Kindly sit down. By far this is the beautiful SONA crowd that ever happened. Here. Many — many beautiful faces and you only have to guess when you see the full face of the person. Senate President Vicente Sotto III and the honorable members of the Senate; House Speaker Lord Allan Jay Velasco and the honorable members of the House of Representatives; Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo; former Presidents Fidel V. Ramos, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, Joseph Ejercito Estrada; the Chief Justice Alexander Gesmundo and the justices of the Supreme Court; Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea and the members of the Cabinet; Dean of the Diplomatic Corps His Excellency Archbishop Charles John Brown and the distinguished members of the Diplomatic Corps; my fellow government workers; and of course to my lovely wife Honeylet; mga mahal kong kababayan . When I assumed the presidency five years ago, dominant in my mind were dreams and visions of a better life for all Filipinos. I saw them as reachable through the institution of reforms and radical changes in both the structure of government and the mode of governance — changes designed responsibility accountability. All in consonance with the truth that public office is a public trust. When I ran for the presidency, I made fundamental promises and strangely you can count them by the fingers of your hand. I made those changes, which I thought that was at that time doable. To offer free education — it's there already — the Universal Health Care , nandiyan na po; the fight against illegal. Drugs, criminality and corruption; and the development of infrastructure, including free irrigation and other big ticket projects, which I thought I did not have the funds to do it, but per chance, among others, they were done in my term. Today as I approach the end of my term, I have less visions but more remembrances. But mine is not to rue or to second guess what have been, but to bear and respond with urgency of unforeseen events as they unfold. Even before I took my oath of office, and everyone else, I suppose knew the gravity enormity of the problems that the country was facing. And because of that awareness, I was driven to hasten the implementation of changes which I believed the country needed, keeping in mind that the Constitution afforded me only six years to make those changes happen. Making a difference within the constitutional time-frame is what I was up against. But no one gets by legally without worming through the needle's eye of constitutional imperatives. That is why I cajoled, I shoved, I pushed, and I tangled with men of wealth and influence who were oblivious to the anguish and pleas of the weak and impoverished. And for that, I was pilloried to no end. But I did not succumb to the attacks. And neither did I allow criticisms, however intense, to dampen my determination and initiatives, because my purpose was pure and unpolluted. While we were busy instituting reforms, the twin ogres of illegal drugs and corruption laid low for a while only to resurface us — still with us, and make no mistake about it corruption is but another term for stealing people's. Money, dashing, in its wake, a nation's goals and aspirations. Due to the brilliant programs and excellent work of our economic managers and the extraordinary cooperation between the executive and the legislative branches of government, our economy, with investor confidence, was poised to leapfrog into the company of the world's fastest growing economies until the COVID-19 pandemic stalled everything. Be that as it may, allow me this opportunity to extend my personal and the nation's gratitude to all those who selflessly gave their all in the fight against COVID-19. Our health workers and other frontliners who risked their own safety to keep our essential health services and our food supply chain running, economic activity, and ensure peace and order in our communities. I would also to extend my deepest appreciation for the generosity of the. Private sector who came to the government's aid in fighting COVID-. 19. I am profoundly thankful for your sustained assistance to our fellow Filipinos, amidst the same deleterious effect of the pandemic to your respective industries. Let me assure you that the government is committed to assist the private sector to regain the commercial vibrance of the country prior to the pandemic. To our local executives, this pandemic pushed you to step up and deliver responsive assistance. I am glad to have seen you undertake new and heightened responsibilities, working doubly hard to protect your constituents. To the international development partners who extended a helping hand amidst the global health emergency, the Philippines remembers your kindness and goodwill with sincere gratitude. And to all of you who answered the call to protect one another by adhering. To our nation's protocols, daghang salamat. But then, let me ask, you and to myself: What is the state of the nation today in the light of the pandemic which has paralyzed. Business activities and crippled even the strongest of the world's economies? Where do we go from here? In my first SONA, I laid down with utmost commitment and resolve the overall direction of my presidency: a comfortable life for all Filipinos anchored on a people-centered approach to development and governance. If I remember correctly, my administration, I said, will implement a human approach to development and governance, in our people's welfare in the areas of health, free education, adequate food and housing, environmental preservation, and respect for the culture. I bore no illusion that steering the nation towards a comfortable life for every Filipino would be easy. Indeed, the past five years have been. Challenging and humbling. I stand here before you today bearing no conceit, but if there is one thing that I could be proud of is that not once did I waver in doing the unpopular even if it meant upholding the greatest good for the greatest number. Before I took office, our country was beset with a communist insurgency scattered across the nation, a separatist movement that sought to divide us on the basis of religion and religious differences, and the proliferation of illegal drugs and criminality. Our armed forces were ill-equipped to deal with internal and external threats, while the police force had been overwhelmed by criminality and the drug trade problem. This is why I made it a priority to strengthen the institution and boost the morale of the men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and the Philippine National Police, and other armed services. Again, I thank Congress for working with the executive department in enhancing the capabilities of the AFP and the PNP through our modernization program. In 2018, we raised the salaries of our military and uniformed policemen and personnel to a level commensurate to the critical role they play in upholding national security and maintaining order. I am asking Congress to pass a Unified System for Separation, Retirement and Pension of Military and Uniformed Personnel to. Maintain government fiscal flexibility and provide adequate benefits and remuneration to our men and women in uniform. This shall apply only to the new entrants of the Military and Services. Hindi ho lahat. It cannot be that we have to pay many, even the salaries of the retired. They get a chunk of the big budget. And if we include the new entrants, the funds available for them would not be enough. It is also high time for us to pass a law providing Free Legal Assistance to AFP and PNP Officers and Enlisted Personnel to help them from charges arising from incidents related to the performance of official duty. The continuous upgrading of our defense capability shall ensure that we shall uphold our territorial integrity and sovereignty from external and. Security threats, among the new additions. We welcomed the country's two missile-capable warships, to enable us to protect our seas. By providing them with the necessary equipment, by enhancing their professional capabilities, and looking after the families of the soldiers who would not be longer be in their company. We do not only strengthen our military and police institutions — we also inspire them to serve this nation with the highest degree of loyalty and patriotism. We enabled them to carry out their mandate to defeat all enemies of the state the cost. Indeed, I am proud of the accomplishments of our troops in securing our nation against all threats to our democratic institutions. But peace must be realized — peace and security is not only a military concern. That is why we deviated from the traditional purely military approach in dealing with matters of national security. With the creation of the National Task Force to End Communist Armed Conflict or NTF-ELCAC, we have made great strides in addressing the root causes of this conflict by empowering our kababayans who have been used by the communists for many decades. In our continuing effort to build safe and conflict-resilient barangays, we have worked towards the sustainable rehabilitation and development of communities where the communists used to operate. Through the NTF-ELCAC, we invested in farm-to-market roads, school buildings, water and sanitation , health stations, and livelihood . Alam mo, kasali na tayo dito lahat. Always every law or every regulation must pass Congress, of course, to the President. But sometimes, you know, in our… , in the performance of our duties, we encounter the not-nice of confronting each other. But because of these interventions, more than former communist rebels have surrendered to the government. They have returned to the fold of the law and are happily reintegrating to , or E-CLIP. It's either I am talking fast or slow or the operator of this thing here is drowsy. Because I had many ad libs along the way. Marami ho akong akin lang. Kaya 'yung… Nahinto ako. When I stop and I process something in my — the gray matter between my ears — hindi humahabol o hindi alam ng operator. Hindi bale, ma'am. Mahal pa rin kita. Lalaki ba ito o 'yung mga babae? Kagabi 'yung mga babae. Sila? O sabihin mo sa kanila makipagkita ako mamaya. I will embrace them for their punctuality in operating this ano this strange machine that gives you the speech. With the support of our local government units, I am confident that support for the communist movement will continue to erode in the next few months. And the decades-old Moro rebellion in Mindanao, we will also bring an end to the armed struggle of the communists once and for all. Sa totoo lang, itong komunista college pa ako. Hanggang ngayon, ang mga sige pa rin. … Speech-speech man lang ito. Kunwari lang pero ang totoo there's a lot of fighting going on in the countryside. But I'd to credit the police and the military for destroying many communist fronts. I think they have destroyed more than 15 apparatus of the fronts of the Communist Party of the Philippines. Alam mo, mag-istorya muna tayo sa taxation. I'd to be frank with you. Everybody, as everybody in this country, are paying taxes to the communists. The Communist Party earns billions but pass on a little to their fighting men who die for an ideology that is rotten and corrupt. They themselves are pocketing the money and their children are studying in Europe and in other places, which I think none of you here can finance such journey. Iyan ang masakit dito. They collect taxes, support Sison in Netherlands, and they do nothing but bad-mouth the government and mouth the war dogmas and everything. Hindi na sila napagod. It's about 53 years in the making. And until today, the poor people are dying. The cadres and of them belonging to the indigenous tribes of our country are fighting a losing battle between the communist and the government. They waste lives, they enlist children and they are proud of it, but they deny it. But when you go to the mountains such as I and Senator Go many times, even during the elections, they were there with many arms that I think somebody — an idiot here in the Philippines supplied the firearms. I'd to ask Congress, Senator Bato, kindly dig on because we have identified the person who imported the AK-47 into this country on the. Pretext of using it in the security — providing security and guards in all, in business establishments and for those who can afford their home. This policeman, I think, is still there. He was a colonel and he is still… Walang nangyari. At maraming sundalong namatay dahil sa mga armas na pinasok nila dito sa Pilipinas. That my orders to the — to you, if you see them walking around, kindly shoot them dead. I would be happy. , you are already charged in the ICC together with me. What is the problem of adding another one? Another idiot Filipino who has caused great damage to our country. Iyan ho. Ang totoo diyan. At itong mga pulis… But let me go back in time. When I first said I will fight drugs in six months, I thought it was in Davao. You can either coerce, intimidate or bribe them, or give them money, I said, "Lumabas kayo ng Davao. Doon kayo magkalat sa Luzon at sa ibang lugar, huwag dito sa Davao." Naniniwala naman ang mga ulol at we were able to attain a sense of normalcy in the city. Iyon ho ang totoo. There are people charged with corruption and even going to prison for not telling the truth in their itong assets and liabilities, nakukulong. Eh p***… Itong mga pulis who are doing their thing, their drugs, they were the manufacturers and they were the distributor of drugs. When I became President, I asked Dela Rosa — he was the chief of police of my city — I promoted him direct to be PNP chief. Four star na kaagad automatic. But I told them, I told him and the others, "Look for the enemies. Look where — for where they are and if you find them, destroy the apparatus, destroy all from the manufacturers to the peddlers because we are fighting a drug war that was being participated in the business by nine generals of the PNP.". Kaya 'yan ang masakit sa loob ko. I did not know that I was fighting my own government. Customs and everyone else were facilitating the importation of drugs. And one importation, as you can see it every night on TV, the police now seize about almost a billion worth of drugs everyday. And if you look at the , there are about a thousand Filipinos arrested everyday by the police in connection with drug trafficking. And that is why I go crazy looking at the situation. They are still around. We do not have the laboratories now because nawala na sila at itong naiwan ngayon are doing the importation. The citizens of another country cooked their shabu in their — — in their tugboat or something and they threw out the product in — contained in the plastic bags and with GPS attached to the contraband that the importers here could find them . That is how we are fighting almost losing a battle against drugs. And now the gangsters of Mexico and the Triad of Laos in that area, they are busy cooking and we have the Filipinos here with no — with nothing in their mind except to destroy a nation — distributes them. That is what I said. I've been asked the question and several times I gave the answer. I am a Filipino and I love my country. I do not want my country in disarray because of drugs. I do not want families break up and become dysfunctional. Iyon ang masakit sa akin. When there — if you want to destroy a family, look for a way of. The member or a resident of that family home, bigyan mo ng droga. 'Pag nandiyan na 'yung droga at they are hooked, and that is the end. Sometimes families are separated because of drugs, becomes dysfunctional,. At 'yung mga asawa magpunta doon sa abroad, ika nga, to look for jobs. And you know, in the Middle East — I am not attributing it to any particular country — but there are tribes in the Middle East who are employing our Filipina citizens and they are uniform. Everybody who comes here home ask them how many hours of sleep they have? They said it's only three to four hours and the food is hogwash. And they sacrifice because they send money to the families back home and thinking all the time that the money was spent usefully, only to realize when she comes home that that family has already dispersed to nowhere. Bakit 'yan? Because itong mga durugista sa baba, itong peddlers, itong basurero tawag — it's a street lingo — they look for families na may mga nanay, tatay nagtrabaho — ang tatay or nanay nagtatrabaho sa abroad. And to think na iniiwan nila ang mga anak nila kung saan-saan na lang, to their neighbors at a tender age of three to four, five, it breaks your heart. Iiwan lang nila sa kapitbahay kung walang mga relatives. And then when they come back five years, four years after, they now realized that their young sons and daughters have gone into prostitution because of drugs and their boys or the fem — the male are nowhere to be found and into the drug business also. Iyon ang pinakamasakit. Masakit sa akin na ang Pilipina pumunta doon para magtrabaho because sexual abuse in some tribes in the Middle East have this notion that if you are a slave or you are a paid person working for them, sexual abuse becomes part of the territory. Kaya diyan ako pumuputok at nakikita ko. 'yung mga pamilya na sira. And to think that they labored without sleep, eating, I said, garbage, and not being allowed to go to their own church to pray for that is prohibited by them. And we have been because of the money that they get, we look the other way around. But still being — you know, bothered every night and they… What will happen to the next succeeding group of…? That is why I have in this speech a talk about slavery. Pero 'yan magprangka ako uli, I would never deny and the ICC can record it: Those who destroy my country, I will kill you. And those who destroy the young people of our country, I will kill you. Talagang yayariin kita because I love my country. You can do it the legal way but it would take you months and years. And you know what? The statistics, I learned the other night, that plenty of those who are in the middle class have been released from prison despite the fact that they are charged with trafficking, which is non-bailable and of them are out. Babae pati lalaki ang kaso. And that is why I said I toyed with the idea — I said, if there is still a space — with due respect to the Senate President, he is a good man, he can become a good vice president. He is holy. Ngayon hindi na siya nahuhuli, noon huling-huli siya. But with due respect to Senator Sotto, who is also running for the vice presidency, he is a capable man, a good man and a Filipino. Sige ako tingin sa harap, nandito pala sa likod ko. You know when you are old — I have been in politics, mayor for 23 years; five years as a congressman, dito, I worked here; and four years of working as vice mayor for my daughter Sara; and the presidency. I have been in politics almost — 23 plus four, plus four — almost 40. Kaya kung — hindi ko na malaman ang seat arrangement dito. Hindi ko. Alam nandoon pa ang mga Senate President pati… Buti't na lang hindi ko. Sinali si Velasco. Baka hindi na ako makabalik doon maya. 'Di bale, diretso. Na ako uwi. I have said many times before: The bloodshed caused by the separatist movement in Mindanao is all about correcting the historical injustices suffered by the Moro people since the period of colonization. With the help of Congress, we were able to pass the Organic Law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, finally fulfilling a promise that was decades in the making. Our victory in Marawi is also a testament to how the Filipino's patriotism is far stronger than any extremist group. As I have said before, many times, there is no room for lawlessness in this country. Rebuilding a better Marawi remains today, still not completed. To Task Force Bangon Marawi, we need to race against time. And you have to finish the necessary work to rehabilitate the war-torn city and bring back its families back home. Now let me talk again about the drugs. I was ahead because I was talking something else. Nag-segue ako. While we have made great strides in ending rebellion and insurgency in various parts of the country, we still have a long way in our fight against the proliferation of drugs. This problem has hounded our country for several decades — destroying families and degrading the moral fiber of our society. When I assumed office, I committed to end this problem at the soonest possible time. We launched an unprecedented war against the illegal drugs and to destroy their apparatus that permeated every level and sector of society. We waged war on the manufacturers, the financiers, the suppliers, the peddlers, and the entire syndicates and, more importantly, their protectors in government. We have rescued and reformed drug dependents because of their idiotic sense of decency by interventions and building facilities not only for their rehabilitation, but also to prepare them to reintegrate into society. Our unyielding campaign led to the surrender of millions of drug dependents; and neutralization, capture and prosecution of thousands of drug personalities; the dismantling of illegal drugs and syndicates and the drug laboratories; the extensive drugs of communities down to the barangay-level, and the cutting of narco politics. You know, allow me a little bit of your time. Wala naman siguro kayong lakad ngayon, unless na you want to — unless you have this appointment with… I'm sure hindi babae 'yan. That would be a sexist statement. But kung nagmamadali talaga, halos tumatakbo, babae 'yan. Kung naglalakad lang nang natural, medyo less important 'yan. Ganoon 'yan pero dito, wala. I am not making any sexist — I'm saying — I'm saying the truth. What is the truth? It's there for all to see. Let me talk about our quest for infrastructure development. Five years ago, the first thing I made sure was to increase our infrastructure spending to an average of five percent of the country's GDP. This is higher than the infrastructure spending of each and past four administrations. Thanks to the comprehensive tax reform program that enabled us to fund critical infrastructure projects. Today, we can see the tangible results all around. MRT-3, with its frequent breakdowns and unloading of passengers midrail, was a horror that was for the daily commuters to endure in the past. Now, MRT-3 no longer unloads passengers but to their destinations. The waiting time between trains has been reduced. 10 trains running at only 30 kilometers per hour before, now runs 23 trains at 60 kilometers per hour. We have taken away the misery of public commuting. We also pursued the completion of the LRT-2 East Extension Project. By extending Line 2 and adding two more stations, we have reduced travel time between Manila and Antipolo from the usual two or three hours to only 40 minutes. Thanks to our partnership with the private sector, we were able to open Stage. 3 of the Metro Manila Skyway in January this year. This decongested EDSA and other major roads in Metro Manila. On Independence Day last month, we also inaugurated the Kalayaan Bridge, part of the BGC-Ortigas Center Link Project, which will reduce the usual one hour travel time between the two business districts to 12 minutes. Beyond Metro Manila, we are pursuing several high-impact projects that will be completed within my term and in the following years. It's a question of money. This July, we inspected the newly-built passenger terminal building of the Clark International Airport. The new and modern passenger terminal is equipped with the latest state-of- the-art technology. This can accommodate 8 million passengers, alleviate air traffic congestion at the NAIA Airport, as as serve as a major growth driver and gateway for Northern and Central Luzon. Madali man ang magpakpak, ang basa ang mahirap. To help promote equitable development, we also completed several roads leading to important trade corridors. Last year, we completed the construction of the Poro Point Freeport Zone Road in La Union, which improved. Nakita na ninyo 'yan? Wala, sige lang pakpak. You do not even have a picture of what I am talking about, I'm sure — to improve access to prime spots for investments and tourism in the Poro Point area. We also completed the Junction Lanao-Pagadian-Zamboanga City Road, which will provide easier access to farms and transport their agricultural products at low cost and in great quantities to industries and economic zones located in Diplahan, Zamboanga Sibugay. The Sorsogon City in Bicol, inuna namin 'yan kasi mahal ko ang mga Bicolano. Pangatawanan ninyo 'yang pakpak ninyo ha, baka… The Sorsogon City Coastal By-Pass Road is targeted for completion by the end of 2021 while the Davao City Coastal Road will be completed by 2023. Bakit? Why? Why is Davao last? Kasi sinabi ko sa kanila, unahin ninyo 'yung buong Pilipinas. During the initial years of my presidency, I told the economic managers and the DPWH, pati si Art Tugade sa Transportation, "Unahin ninyo ang Luzon at ibang areas sa Mindanao. Do not look into the political entrails of the city and the other provinces." Sinadya ko talaga na ipanghuli ang Davao. Kaya ang — for the Davaoeños, you must understand that we cannot unahin natin iyong — kasi taga diyan ako eh. Kung hindi ako sigurado taga-Davao, tapos na 'yan pareho ng iba. Kaya lang sinabi ko, make Davao the last priority. Totoo 'yan. Sorsogon is a — a little politics, but that's the territory of our Vice President Leni Robredo. Are you here, Ma'am? Ah, Zoom. Mayroon ho kayong… Sorsogon at iba pa. We have inaugurated new highways, roads and skyways. We have bought new trains. These are all testament that we have greatly eased the grueling experience of traveling and commuting. And to sustain our momentum in infrastructure development, I have directed the DPWH, DOTr, NEDA, Department of Finance and DBM to be on full speed to ensure that our flagship projects will be completed within my term, those that would help disperse economic activity outside the densely populated Metro Manila. I thus earnestly call upon our LGU and private sector partners to help us full speed towards the realization of our flagship and others. Let me talk about — let me dwell about governance. As we improved connectivity, we worked towards greater convenience for our travelers. We have extended the validity of Philippine passports to 10 years to lessen the burden of our travelers and OFWs. We have also gone beyond merely addressing the three million backlog of. Driver's licenses in 2016. We also extended for the new cards the validity of the driver's license to five years, and addedly, we shall the issuance of these driver's licenses within 10 years — which would be good for 10 years if there is no traffic violation. Punta ka doon sa LTO, you have a good sight. Mayroong ano 'yan eh, I think there's an examination there somewhere to test your ability to drive safely. And you go back 10 years after, and you think that you good — you still have a good sight and your reflexes are still good. Ten years, maraming banggaan 'yan, sigurado ako. You know, after 10 years, no after five, there should be a stricter measure to issue the 10 years validity of a driver's license by imposing stringent requirements to test the essential functions of eyesight, then the hearing. Iyong iba hindi na nakakarinig ng silbato eh. And I have to… You know, 10 years is long. I it, it's good. But we should have, as I said, in five years, we should go there for a medical makeover. Tingnan lang kung kaya pa mag… Not only did we extend the validity of licenses and passports, we also sought to make long lines a thing of the past by streamlining government processes. These efforts are embodied in the Ease of Doing Business Act, which Congress passed 2018. Thank you, Congress. Sa inyo 'yun. Ako ang nagpirma pala, ako nag-execute, pakpak rin kayo. Dapat ganoon ang SONA, sabihin mo lahat at sabihin mo na your — not your qualms, but your misgivings somewhere there. Transactions will be further streamlined with the roll-out of the Philippine Identification System or the PhilSys through the Philippine Identification System Act. With this, we hope to facilitate better access for all Filipinos even in the far-flung areas. I want to say something about this but I'm taking long, you know. We also ensured the modification of the Salary Schedule for Civilian Government Personnel through the Salary Standardization Law 5 — a necessary measure for our civil servants to recognize their work and accomplishments as as a gesture of gratitude and good will. We have this legacy and we hope to pass on the establishment of the Central Business Portal, a single site for all business-related transactions such as securing business permits, licenses, and clearances. Launched earlier this year, it shall elevate our global standing in the doing business arena and improve our country's competitiveness. Alam mo ito, 'yung queuing, when I was a mayor — I don't know, but a legislator or a senator or a congressman, not he is higher than the others, but kung dumaan ka as a local government employee worker, me, for 23 years, itong queuing matagal ko na ito. In Davao, ang passport issuances nandoon sa likod ng SM. Isang gabi nag-motor ako, nakita ko 'yung mga paa sa semento. I was thinking, "Anong nangyari dito?" nagbaba ako, sabi ko, "Bakit dito kayo natutulog?" Sabi nila, "You know, Mayor, ang pagbukas niyan kailangan nakapila na kami, 'pag hindi, sunod — ibang araw na naman kami.". I called for the chief of office and I said, "Look I may not be the person. Above you supervising, but make sure that this thing will not happen. Tomorrow, as in tomorrow." Tapos tinawagan ko ang — itong ano, sabi ko, "Why don't you give cards?" Kung marami sila paglinya, may maglakad na marshal, "O ito, ikaw bukas at 4 p.m." you have to study the time and motion of people doing work. Sabi ko, "Ayaw ko dito sa Davao." Because in Davao — in Mindanao, nasa Davao ang ano eh ang issuances ng passport. Ngayon pagka-Presidente ko, sabi ko, "Ayaw ko nang makita 'yan." Not during my time, not during my time. Maghanap ka ng ibang panahon. Ayusin ninyo 'yan. I do not want people queuing under the heat of the sun and rain. Kaya sabi ko, "'Di magbigay kayo ng card." They should go to one window, magkuha kayo kung kailan sila makabalik. Divide — I said, study your time and the motion of, you know, the process of… And dito nangyari na because I insisted. Today, there is no more queuing, in the National Office — Statistics Office, nakita ko. Talagang sabi ko na, "Either you fix that thing or I will resign tomorrow because I could not bear to see those people. Hindi sa panahon ko. Kung hindi ko madala, hindi ko man kayo mapatay, hindi ko kayo mabugbog, ako ang aalis sa gobyerno." Sabi ko, "Ayusin ninyo 'yan. Hindi ko gustong makita 'yan.". Since 2016, the Office of the President has issued 138 Executive Orders, 43 Administrative Orders, 86 Memorandum Circulars, 52 Memorandum Orders and 1,038 Proclamations. These issuances have integral guideposts in government administration and development agenda. The Office of the President has demonstrated careful stewardship of the powers, by initiating reforms. We upgraded and improved the systems and processes to ensure that it can provide the best service to the institution of the presidency and the offices under it and the Filipino people. To further promote transparency and accountability in government, we also issued the order on Freedom of Information opens up the records, transactions, decisions and issuances of all government agencies. In relation to this, we also have the Presidential Anti-Corruption Commission that is tasked to run after corrupt and erring government officials and bring them to justice. Alam mo, I don't know if you have come to know about this. I have 'yung Pastillas sa ano sa airport. There were 43 personnel involved. I fired them all. Talagang pinaalis ko sa gobyerno. Nagbalot pa nga ako ng pera sa. Pastillas. Sabi ko kay — "Magbalot ka, lagyan mo ng pera kay ito ang ipakain ko sa kanila.". Tinawag ko 43 of them from the Immigration. Mabuti't na lang nandiyan si Justice Secretary Guevarra that prevented me from doing it because kung hindi siya dumating — and I never expected him to be there — bigyan ko isa't isa 'yung papel at ipakain ko talaga 'yung pera sa kanila. "Gusto mo ng pera? Hala kainin mo." That is the best way of… Then, you fire them. Customs, 73 plus 42. And everyday you have about — we have dismissed about 200 government personnel but some I did not allow the publication because ayaw — may mga pamilya eh. Of late, 'yung sabi nila na huwag na lang ano kasi nasasaktan 'yung mga pamilya. Ngayon, wala na. I have stopped it. But there is no — there is no saying that we cannot reimpose it again for all of these idiots. I still have about a year to go. I will — I will reach you somehow. But corruption, it's endemic in government. You cannot stop corruption. Nobody can stop corruption unless you overturn the government . If I were the next president, if you think there's a need for you to change everybody in the system, then you declare martial law and fire everybody and allow the new generation to come in to work for the government. Eh kung hindi mo ganunin, walang mangyari. Nandiyan — it's in the system eh. Kagaya ng drugs, sino ba namang maniwala na nine — nine generals sa pulis were into trafficking of drugs? And because they are — they are policemen, the charges , you know, disappear there. Because the prosecution, the investigation which form part of the vital documents in court, wala eh. Nobody was investigating because they are also policemen. Kaya 'yan kahirap ang ano. Kaya kung gusto mo itong mga 'to, talagang… The only way to do it call them and say, "Look for another job. Don't — don't…" Ganoon kahirap. Now, let me pursue my talk with the foreign policy of the country. In the international arena, we have vigorously pursued an independent foreign policy centered on the promotion and protection of our core national interests. Yet… Sigurado kayo sa pinakpakan ninyo? I was laying the predicate of what I am going to say. Yet we conti — I will give the cue then you clap your hands. If I… Yet we… Biro lang 'yan ha. Yet we continue to work with all nations and seek partnerships that work. Because despite differences, it still is an interdependent world where interests and objectives intersect. Now, partners - heretofore silent or equivocal - have expressed principled positions that echo our own: that disputes and contested areas, the majesty of the law must prevail. And this is. Welcome. To our friends in ASEAN and around the world: Thank you for supporting my Government, my country and people when it mattered. I assure you that the Philippines will remain a responsible member of the international community and we will work with you to achieve our shared objectives. But no mistake — but no mistake… But make no mistake , gone are the days when the Philippines decides and acts in the shadows of great powers. We will assert what is rightfully ours and fight for what is rightfully due to the Filipino people. We do not have any SONA everyday. Now is as good as any other time to let it out from sa puso mo. This is why we sent back container vans of garbage because our country is not a dumpsite. And the first country to do that, hindi ko alam kung bakit, ang Canada. And the container was there for three years because hindi alam ng port authorities kung anong gawain nila sa garbage. And I said, "Isauli mo. I want it done tomorrow. Those containers must be out of our country. 'Pag hindi, kayong lahat, all of you in Customs, I'll fire you." That is a good ground for dismissing people for accepting the garbage. Kaya… May isa pa. Pero let me — let me end the story. The Balangiga. We welcomed back the bells of Balangiga after many decades because a historic wrong needed to be corrected. The deal was I would say I am in bad faith. Sigurado 'yan. I will admit it. But this is the story. The Americans — former soldiers, war veterans went to see me — I think that was in Aguinaldo — and some military men. And in no uncertain terms, they said that, "You have been invited by Trump to go to America. Have you decided to go there?" I said, "No." "Why?" Sabi ko, "I do not the way that you are treating my country." "Why?" I said, "For one…" And there was the clamor now of Balangiga. "You return the bells of Balangiga." That's a war sacred also to the soldiers. Then it is more sacred to us in addition to the religion — the Roman Catholic Filipinos — the Church. Ang sabi nila, "Why don't we make a deal?" Si Hogan, he's an Ame — is he around? He's a CIA agent. Sabi niya, "Isauli namin, pupunta ka?" Because I said earlier in my presidency, "There will never be a time that I will go to America." Eh itong mga media mahilig mag-udyok eh. "Ah ganoon, bakit ka hindi pupunta? O arte mo lang 'yan eh?" Sabi ko, "Then you watch me." 'Di gusto ninyong malaman. Sabi ko sa America, "Yes, I consider going to America.". Then, sabi ko, "Work on it." In two months' time, they told me that the ship carrying the Balangiga bells are on their way to deliver it to Quezon. You removed it, you put it back there, kayo mismo. Tulong-tulong sila doon, nabalik na. And this Hogan said na, "Oh, when are you going to go to America?" Sabi ko, "I do not have the time, but I will go there." Noong malapit na, hindi na talaga ako pumunta. … ", how about your promise?" Sabi ko, ", I lost time to do it. I cannot do it now.". Pero talaga, in my mind, and the Americans know it, I was — there was never in my mind a trip to America. Iyong Balangiga, sabi ko, you massacred one barangay — barrio noon — women and children and all pinatay nila lahat because that bell, Balangiga, was used to call the people for prayers, ganoon. Sa simbahan 'yun eh. 'yung ginawa nila, every time it is used, the Americans knew that it was it has a great significance to the Filipinos, the Balangiga. After the massacre of one barangay, how many at the time, we would never know but it was, I said, isang barrio. Noon — barangay ngayon; barrio noon 'yan eh. Barrio is an American word, the barrio. They also call the small places in Mexico barrio. The Americans borrowed it from the Spaniards, barrio. Sabi ko, the blood — you got it at the expense of the blood of Filipinos. I… "Do not hurry me up. If I go to America, it will be in my own time." Pero , wala ako. I have not been to America for almost 10 years, 20 — 22 years. I have not visited America and I do not have any intention of visiting it anymore. We called on the world to dismantle the heinous kafala system — ito ring isa — because the Filipino is no slave and to anyone. Anywhere and there is no room for modern day slavery. We helped a new global civil rights movement for the migrant worker. And, we asserted the arbitration ruling on the South China Sea —. And in no uncertain terms — bilaterally, the ASEAN and finally, at the United Nations General Assembly. And let me talk about I said in the September of last year: the Arbitral Award is now part of the international law and beyond compromise and beyond the reach of the passing governments to dilute, to diminish or abandon. That is the problem. Let me now — to everybody — everybody in the Middle East, I would to tell them that not only Filipinos but all human beings, the kafala has no place there because it's a setup for slavery. Either you correct it or we will ask our workers, Filipino workers, to go home. Sabi ko bahala na kung mahirap lang kami dito, lang. We will our best to make up for what they have lost, what they will lose in the process. But we will never allow them to be slaves. But we need to do more. With our partners, we continue scaling. Our maritime domain awareness defense capabilities. Yet, we will not close our doors on diplomacy and détente. Because that is how disputes are settled and never by force. Let me… Alam mo, I respect the opinion. You should be aware by now of. How I talk, on matters of — crucial matters that involved the. Country. Ito bang arbitral ruling, I've said it in — I think in the latter part of the speech — I said that what's your problem in the arbitral ruling? America and some Filipinos — brilliant Filipinos, I would say — keep on pushing for something, which I do not know. I have made a speech before the UN, naka-Zoom lang rin, nandito lang ako. Hindi ako pumunta. Doon. But in that speech, I laid down the bare, sabi ko — ng ating administrasyon. Ano pa ang gusto ninyo? What will I do with a document that not bind China because they were never a part of that arbitration? There was no arbitration at all because it was only the Philippine side was heard. And good. But ito ngayon that there is the arbitral ruling, you know, I do not want to insult these people pushing me for something more than what I can handle. At ano ang gusto nila, makipag-giyera? "Do something." What do. Something? Do you want war against China? , I'll tell you, even on the coast beach of Palawan, before you can take off, the missile of China would be there in about five or 10 minutes. It would be a massacre if I go and fight a war now. We are not yet a competent and able enemy of the other side. What I did I was being nice to them. But for some people to say that I was helped by China in being President, these idiots. I will never, never do that. Hindi na bale ako hindi ma-Presidente, hindi ko talaga gagawain 'yan. To be what? Receiving money from China to buy votes? They say that they helped. In some Chinese communities, the gossip going around was that. "support Duterte." But the whole of the Chinese community in the Philippines went for me. Why? Kasi sa Davao noong mayor ako, ni minsan hindi ako tumatanggap maski Christmas gift. Dito marami sa dito sa Maynila Presidente ako ngayon, maraming. Nagpapadala ng baril, kung anong ano diyan, sabi ko, "Isauli mo 'yan". Iyong mga relo. Eh itong aking relo, it's IWC. This is only 300,000. But the Patek that has come way, isinauli ko talaga. "Return it o 'pag hindi, itapon mo sa Pasig sa harapan nila.". Hindi — hindi ako tinulungan ng China. Nag-usap kami ng China civilly but after election. And after election, I was a good friend of President Xi, until now. When the pandemic struck, the first country I called for help was China. President Xi, sabi ko, "Mr. President, we have no vaccination program here because we do not have the vaccines. We have not been able to invent one. We have a hard time." He said, "no, it's . We'll send you.". And he send us — donated about 1,500,000 of vaccines. Ganoon, kaya nga. Sabi ko ako, lalo na kaming mga Bisaya, mabigat sa amin 'yan, for us. Visayans, iyong utang na loob mabigat talaga 'yan. Hindi mo mabayaran ng ano pero 'pag may utang na loob ako sa iyo, you can be sure that I will be your friend, a true friend and die for you. Pero itong China magdayo, bakit ako magpakamatay diyan? Iyang sundalo ko ubusin ko? How can we fight China? Do we have the weapons? Do we have the — everything? Now comes America, they say that if the attack is against the Philippines, they will defend. But they issued a statement that America does not meddle in conflicts involving the boundaries of other nations. And if America has to go to war, you would have to go to Congress to get — American Congress to get the authority to go to war. That is why many presidents hindi na lang — it was a — a mere — an error, a mistake — a malicious mistake. No president has ever been punished for attacking nations, getting into a fight with nothing. And if they come here, , ang problema kasi nandito na 'yung Balangiga. Isauli na. Lang natin uli. I'll return it 'pag ito'y… It's no big deal to us. Iyan. Ang bells, ring it until you die. Fulfilling my promise to our coconut farmers and the Filipino people, my administration has worked with Congress to pass the Coconut Farmers and Industry Trust Fund Act. We have returned also the Coco Levy funds to its true and rightful owners — our coconut farmers. The fund is now worth an estimated to be 75 billion , which will be utilized according to the plans and programs in the Coconut Farmers and Industry Development Plan for the direct benefit of the coconut farmers and the development of the coconut industry. In our effort to ensure that food is within reach of every Filipino family, we worked for the passage of the Rice Tariffication Law in 2019 despite pushbacks. This resulted in the stabilization of rice supply and food prices. The proceeds from the tariffs enabled us to provide our farmers with modern machineries that increased their yield and sustaining the growth in agricultural production. We also fulfilled our promise to free irrigation. That was the first promise I made some — in San Miguel, Bulacan when I was campaigning. The farmers invited me to go into the farms inside San Miguel, Bulacan. And we had a sort of a — , a meeting, and the first thing that they were complaining about was the severity of the irrigation that they have to pay 5,000 every month — ah every year. Si sabi ko, "I will work on it." Free. Irrigation Service Act of 2018 is a product that now lowers the cost of agricultural production, for poor farmers. We also worked to ensure that households have adequate supply of clean water. Potable and affordable water is more than a commodity. It is a vital public good. This is why I used my political capital to fight vested interests behind disadvantageous water service contracts that burdened consumers with unjustified water price increases. With the signing of with water concessionaires, consumers will be protected at least until 2037. Ganito 'yan eh, there is this concessionaire, dalawa. Ayaw ko na lang mag-ano — I will not mention names pero this is what happened. Ang dalawang concessionaires, one in the south and the one is north, as the rich cartel dito sa Southeast Asia, ang kina-capture nila ang electricity pati tubig. Dito sa tubig, in this contract with the water concessionaires, we made many concessions that , sabi ko, if you look at the contract and look at the Anti-Graft Law, talagang it's all anti-graft. All of the sentences even the period and the question marks there. Ah bakit? Sila walang problema sa tax because the people, consumers, will pay the taxes for them. Sila kung malugi, sabi nila hindi nila kasalanan and we can — I can think of it through not of their own fault, sabi doon bayaran natin sila malugi. We pay for the tax corporation nila at sila ang mag-decide kung i-increase nila o i-decrease nila ang water prices. The regulators, itong mga regulators sa Pilipinas walang magawa and they acceded to the contract. It was — I do not know how to put it. Kaya ako nag-pardon, 'di ba nagmura ako? Sabi ko, biro mo kung malugi sila, babayaran pa natin. Tayo ang — ang corporate tax nila, tayo ang magbayad. And it's a cartel, that service concessionaires are part of the cartel of Malaysia and Indonesia, and they form part of that mother corporation. Itong mga sa Pilipinas pati sa Malaysia, Indonesia they are. — kumbaga sa istorya, chapter lang 'yan sila. It's being controlled up by the… Kaya sabi ko, "Wala ito." I told them — I told Dominguez, "Tell them that I. Am no longer honoring the contract." Mayroon pa doon payment of itong tax. — water treatment plant to be constructed in the Harrison Plaza site. Iyon ang pinirmahan natin. 1997 up to the present or up to the month that I blew my top, nagbabayad — ewan ko kung ngayon nagbabayad na. There's. A kuwan there sa water bills ninyo for enhancement of quality water. Ang ibig sabihin water treatment. And they were collecting since 1997 until now how of the Filipino's money are with them for nothing, not even for a song? Kaya ako, if there is something — hindi naman proud — but if there is something someday that my children will say: "What have you done for my country?" Sabihin ko, sila. Talagang inupakan ko sila. Sabi ko… Ayaw ninyo? You do not want it? , , I will — I will confiscate your system and call the military to operate it. I will exercise the eminent domain and expropriate all of your assets here kasi gagawin ko. Iyon ang nangyari sa… sinabi ko sa military, in one of our meetings immediately after that incident, I said, "If I do not make it to the finish line, kindly — look kindly at the Filipino at tanungin ninyo kung ano na ang nangyari sa kanila, iyang tubig na yan.". Now, there is a new contract. I have not yet — I have to thoroughly digest it inside. I have to absorb it every word of it that the Filipino is protected. 'Pag nandiyan na 'yan, then I will sign. But I will not forget, I'm telling them the crime is there already and any Filipino who would want to go after you, can. Sabi ko, "I will not free you, I will not — there's no way we're in. Your… I will never allow that. Make a new contract, realize. Everyday that I can call you.". Itong frequency, frequency ng ABS-CBN. Iyan ang pinaka-ideal kasi, you know, frequency is everywhere. But there is a spot, kung sa golf, a soft spot na maganda 'yung… Wala akong problema sa ABS-CBN. They got my money, I'm not… They wanted to return it when the case blew up at they printed all the garbage including my daughter as a drug trafficker. Nilamon ko na lang lahat 'yun because I never wanted to be — to appear vindictive. But itong ano… They are cheating government by the billions in taxes. And they still want that frequency because 'yan ang pinapag-awayan. No. I will give it to a Filipino na gustong maggawa nang tamang ano and pay. Because sa ABS-CBN, 'yung even their equipment were imported tax-free kaya talaga ako hindi magpapayag. They still owe government billions. In the contract diyan sa nakalagay doon four hectares. ang binabayaran nila four hectares sa property taxes. Supposed they are occupying 40 hectares, that complex there. Pero ginamit nila na papel 'yung four hectares. Iyon lang ang binabayaran nila. Kung hindi ba naman… Kaya ko sila inaway. And, … Our micro, small and medium enterprises or MSMEs constitute 99.6 percent of our country's businesses and are vital to economic activity, job creation, and poverty reduction. Ipinaramdam natin ang ating malasakit sa maliliit na negosyante sa pamamagitan ng Pondo sa Pagbabago at Pag-asenso Program. Since 2017, mayroon na tayo niyan. We have the program. The program has provided over 219,000 underprivileged microentrepreneurs with an alternative to the exploitative lending 5-6. Iyan ang naka ano sa… You know what, I have to go to — if need be, I have to go to India. Iyong 5-6 nila ng Turko, tinatawag nilang Turko, kung maghiram ka sa kanila ng 10,000, pahiramin ka niyang hindi pera 10,000. Six, seven thousand lang. And the others, mga refrigerator or the that you do not even need in the house, bilhin mo sa kanila. Sala set, lahat na. That is part of… You do not want the furniture, the refrigerators, they won't give you the… Kaya ang Pilipino nabuktot. Alam mo ang buktot? Naging hunchback na lang sa trabaho, ganoon pa man. Kaya ako, sasabihin ko itong mga Turko, you better come up with a fair scheme if you want to go into business sa money lending, but not at that usu — usury a thousand times. Likewise, to further support development of our micro and small businesses, we radical reforms in the tax system to ease the taxation burden and increase the net income of lower wage earners and small businesses. Thanks to Congress… Iyan hindi pa ninyo alam ha. Sabi ko lang… Thanks to Congress and our revenue generating agencies, our tax reforms sustained our economic growth from the third quarter of 2016 to the fourth quarter of 2019, which made the Philippines one of the fastest growing economies in Asia until the pandemic scourge. Iyon talaga ang… , I don't know what's the plan of God. He sent us something which hit us in the heart. We see many — there's no way of telling when this virus would disappear from the planet of the Earth. We can only pray to God to look into our direction and decide on what will happen to this planet he created. However, tax laws are not always perfect and that is why every now and then, they have to be revisited to see if they are at pace with the changing times. Let us therefore continue to monitor the relevance and impact of our tax laws. On individuals and private institutions to prevent serious damage on their financial health. Going now to the social and health issues. To unburden our people of the hefty costs of tertiary education, my administration worked with Congress to pass a landmark legislation that had remained unpassed for many years: the Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act in 2017 which provides free education to college students in state universities. Thank you, Congress. We also passed the Universal Health Care Act in 2019. And to supplement this, I also signed into law the Malasakit Centers Act in 2019. Kasi ganito 'yan eh, 'pag ang pobreng Pilipino nasa ospital, magpunta pa siya doon sa kung saan makahingi ng tulong. Ang ginawa, in Davao, ginawa namin 'yung lahat na kailangan, 'yung Internal Revenue kung nandiyan, business permit, diyan na lang sa isang lugar, medisina, kunin nila. Diyan mismo sa ospital, hindi na sila maglakad-lakad. And to me, that is one of the — let me find the word — a poignant act of Congress and of the executive department. Legislation, which was sponsored by Senator Bong Go — if you feel standing up, you can, Senator, mas sikat ka pa sa guest speaker — unburdened our people of the tedious process of going to various agencies and offices in order to avail of assistance from government. I am pleased to report that we have already established 130 Malasakit Centers across the country that has already helped millions of Filipinos in their hospitalization needs. By establishing Malasakit Centers all over the country, we have levelled the playing field and provided our less fortunate countrymen the medical care they deserve. We will be establishing more. God willing, if we are still around. Sa pagtatag ng Malasakit Center, hindi na po kailangan lumapit at humingi ng tulong sa iba't ibang ahensya ng gobyerno. Ang gobyerno na ang lumalapit sa tao. Let us talk about COVID. It's mentioned everywhere in the speech, but what — what's this g**d*** virus is? I have to admit: back when I decided to answer your call and run for higher office, never, never did I imagine that my presidency would not only be judged. By how I made good on my campaign promises in fighting illegal drugs, criminality, and corruption but by how I led our nation dumake — during , the global pandemic. Hindi na ako maka-pronounce mabuti baka mayroon na ako. May ambulansya ba diyan? Mukhang iba na ang… You know, I cannot pronounce the words. I hope this is not asymptomatic. Prior to the pandemic, we recorded our lowest debt-to-GDP ratio since 1986, the highest revenue effort since 1997, the highest credit rating in the country's history — 'yung sa bangko — because if your rating is high, it's easy to borrow at maliit lang ang interest, that is the dynamics of a rating by Fitch. Fitch and & Poor's, mga ganoon — and the lowest rates of unemployment, underemployment, and poverty, it's still there. It is beyond dispute that our economic and governance fundamentals were robust when COVID-19 hit us. I am sure that can be said about the way we took on the daunting challenge of preserving lives while sustaining our momentum towards developmental — dito na lang ako — goals. Naturally, we prioritized saving lives. Buhay muna bago ang lahat. Ibig sabihin, inuna natin 'yung gastos — 'yung pera natin sa pandemic. Kinuha ng — lahat ng anong mga budget. Si Dominguez 'yan. Iyon ang ginamit ninyo sa Bayanihan 1 and 2. Doon natin kinuha 'yung pera. We moved quickly to safeguard the being of every Filipino through preventive and responsive health and safety measures, and broad and inclusive social amelioration programs or SAP. Thanks to the support of Congress, we launched the extensive Social Protection Program in our country's history, with the passage of Bayanihan 1 and Bayanihan 2. Indeed, our national health system and resilience were tested to the hilt. Countless lessons were learned and continuous improvements put in place. Kahit anong krisis ay kayang malampasan, kung tunay na may malasakit at bayanihan. I agree. At the early stages of the pandemic, our testing capacity was limited. Recognizing the importance of conducting more tests to ensure early detection and timely isolation of confirmed COVID-19 cases, we ramped up our testing capacity. We now have more than 260 accredited laboratories nationwide which is capable of conducting at least 50,000 tests daily. All regions now can conduct their own COVID-19 tests. To take care of mild and asymptomatic cases, we established over 9,000 temporary treatment and monitoring facilities across the country, with a total bed capacity of more than 140,000. Together with local governments and the private sector, we quickly established mega quarantine facilities that could accommodate more cases. Modular hospitals and quarantine facilities have also been established nationwide, in Metro Manila. For our severe COVID cases, our tireless healthcare workers ensure that you are provided with the best care round the clock, based on latest developments and global best practices. Our health experts continue to actively participate in the search for safe and effective COVID-19 medicines. With the help of Congress… Kita mo sa lahat. I never said, wala kang makikita, "that, I, the key construction of a bridge that is nowhere to be found today," iyong mga ganoon. Ako, sa inyo talaga. With the help of Congress, we passed 13 measures that established new and improved the capacity of existing hospitals around the country to provide quality care and services to our people, amid the ongoing . These include establishing new medical facilities in Mandaluyong City, Bacolod and Davao Occidental; increasing bed capacities of existing health facilities in Quezon City, Ilocos Sur, La Union, and Palawan; upgrading health facilities in that area to include Leyte. Currently, we have received over 30 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines. We expect 36 million vaccines this month and in August. We have inoculated more than million Filipinos — of which have received their first dose. At least 17 million. , I think the landscape — the health landscape of the country continues to improve as we, you know… With the continuous of COVID-19 vaccines, we are ready to boost further our daily vaccination rate. I am also encouraging our local government units to hasten their roll out and strengthen their inoculation program. San Juan City, for one, have vaccinated 70 percent of their population in a month's time. Saludo ako sa inyo at kay Mayor Zamora. We cannot continue living in the shadow of this potent enemy, now that science and medicine has proven that it is possible to live with — if not defeat — this virus. The health and safety protocols we put in place have proven effective in slowing the spread of the virus. But the best solution is still vaccination. Am I … Mataas na ba? Kasi kung mataas na, putulin na lang ninyo itong gumagalaw dito para sabihin ko, eh wala na man akong mabasa. 'Pag matagal na… Those who want to go home, you raise your. Hands. Pati si Monsignor baka itaas niya ang kamay niya eh. That is why I implore our countrymen who are now in the list of sectors to be inoculated to get vaccinated now. To those who received their first doses, please return for your second shot. I also ask for patience to those who are next in line to receive their vaccine. More and more COVID-19 vaccines are arriving each week and you will soon have your turn. Corollary to this, it is high time that clear, precise and uniform protocols and guidelines are issued in anticipation of the vaccination of more Filipinos and the steady reopening of our society. You know, pagpasensyahan ninyo ako. I… I ask… I beg your kind indulgence. But I have to say this — to talk about something which would affect us all. Iyang… It seems that this government is far away from the people. Iyong serbisyo talaga na totoo. Noong isang araw, nakita ko, I don't know what place was that. Ang mga tao nakapila and they say that they were there at 4 o'clock, lumalakas 'yung ulan, sa payong lang sila. Nanonood ako sa report because I listen to the report every morning. Makukuha mo sa mga radio station 'yan eh. I was having breakfast. I was listening to the TV, at nakita ko 'yung mga tao nakapila, lumalakas ang ulan. Sabi ko, "P***…" Eh doon sa breakfast table, nagmura ako. Pero dito good boy man ako kay may mga religious diyan baka… I thus call on the National Task Force Against COVID-19 to see to it that this happens — I mean the protection. We have spent enormous amounts of resources to build our capacities to overcome this pandemic. We cannot. Afford more lockdowns lest our economy bleeds to the point of irreversible damage. Balikan ko 'yung ano, bakit mo papilahin? At sabi kasi doon libre lahat na, wala ng ano. Nagpuntahan 'yung mga tao na nagpila kasi wala nang lista-lista pero sabi ng mga ito, alas kwatro pa sila. T*** i**. Hindi lang ako puwedeng mag… Alam mo sa totoo lang, hindi naman ako nagyayabang. I am an ordinary Filipino citizen. You, I get hurt when people are nearly almost brutalized. Bakit hindi ka magkuha? It's rain time. Malakas ang monsoon — southwest monsoon. Dumadaan talaga sa Pilipinas. Gamitin mo ang utak mo. You should look for a gym at bigyan mo lahat ng tao ng number. Hanggang dito lang for this… Hanggang dito lang tayo, balik kayo itong bukas from 15 to 20, kayo na naman bukas. Bigyan mo ng card. Prepare a card where you can — the marshal will go around the queuing na… Bakit mo…? Hindi ko maintindihan — there's media — hindi ko maintindihan bakit gawain mo 'yan sa Pilipino? Iyan ang tinatanong ko. Why do you have to do it to the Filipino? You can always — you know, maghanap ka ng… Tsk. There is always a gymnasium. Mga eskwelahan walang klase ngayon. Bakit hindi mo gamitin doon? Bakit ka maghanap ng isang room…? T******** na… Kaya lang ako… , it is my — to my chagrin because I'm… Gusto kong lumabas. Itong PSG lang na ito ang… You know, sabihin ko sa inyo, huwag kayong mag-presidente kay wala. Talagang… Sabihin ko maliit ang suweldo, wala ka. If you are not there for the — mag-corrupt ka diyan, , it would make you a billionaire. Overnight. But kung magtrabaho ka lang ng ganito… Ako Presidente, gusto kong lumabas doon, sabihin ko, "Hoy, mga p***** i** ninyo, bakit ganito 'to? Bakit ganoon kayo ka-estupido?" I mean, the Filipino does not deserve it even if they are not paying taxes. Because the theory of government is that all money belongs to the people and the money is there, it belongs to all of us and it should be used for public good. But. What — what is the use of public good if you are not good and stupid? Ganoon ang mangyayari sa Pilipino. I'm letting off my… Kasi kung hindi lang talaga bawal, eh itong PSG hindi ako pinapalabas. Magsabi ako magpunta ako doon, "Sir, hindi puwede 'yan, hindi puwede." Kulong talaga ako. Mag-presidente ka, sa totoo lang you are a prisoner. You are brought here, kunwari ka pa de-chopper ka, de-guwardiya, tapos uwi ka doon sa bahay mo, tapos hindi ka na makalabas. Preso ka talaga. "Tawagin mo 'yung security, 'yung gusto kong pumunta…" "Sir, hindi. Pasensya na." Tapos pagalitan mo, sabihin, "Sir, eh ang authority namin does not come from you, it comes from a law kami ang masunod.". Talagang… Sige ka pirma a bunch of papers. If you read it hanggang umaga trabaho ka. Suweldo mo ganoon lang. Give me 219,000 tapos ganoon ang trabaho mag-isa ka. Buti't ngayon kay nandito 'yung asawa ko, nandito 'yung anak ko. Nabubuhay 'yung loob ko mag-uwi ako sa bahay. Ngayon. Tsk. Looking forward, today is my last State of the Nation Address, but this is by no means my swan song. I shall never cease to implore Congress to pass vital and critical legislation as as push the entire government to ensure nothing less than the full recovery and revitalization of our country. But to do this, it is necessary for us to first overcome the crippling fear, anxiety and uncertainty that caused — that was caused by the threat of the COVID-19 virus. , I do not know what to do. I have to listen to the Task Force. This is a group of people volunteering to be a collective advisor that would give you the advice collectively, we put it that way, na sila ang mag-ano, magsabi. And we're waiting for the word. I am referring to COVID D, Delta. It is rampaging now in Indonesia, Thailand, India, and many parts of Asia. And ang sabi doon sa — the Western medicine says that it is far more aggressive and far more dangerous and it can cause death than the COVID-19 original. This is as good as any other time to say it, if sees that it is dangerous, you have to go back to lockdown. If there are many people in other parts of the world killing as many, then Delta, if ever it will spread — we have it here now — I hope it will not go any further. But if something wrong happens, I'll have to be strict and I have now my word that there will be a… what happened in the early days. Eh kung ganoon ang COVID D, saan tayo pupunta? And if there is — it requires a new vaccine, we do not have it yet, I do not. Know what… we will have to pray for salvation. Sabihin natin,. "Diyos, we have done everything. But you know, this time we are put hard on these that happened.". Rest assured that we will exert every effort to restore the lost livelihood of our affected countrymen. I have recently signed an Executive Order creating the task force that will shepherd the country's National Employment Recovery Strategy. The Task Force recently partnered with the Employers' Confederation of the Philippines to implement the Reform, Rebound, and Recover Program that aims to vaccinate qualified workers to fill in more than one million jobs. These jobs will be created by different business associations in the fields of construction, information technology, BPO, and electronics. To our business associations, thank you for joining in our effort to bring back lost income opportunities for our workforce. Another important component of our employment recovery strategy is the retooling of our workers to prepare them for better job opportunities. Since the of community quarantines, over million availed of the TESDA's free online training programs. I am directing the National Employment Recovery Strategy Task Force, TESDA, to ensure the upskilling of our workers and increase their employability. I expect the task force to work double time not only to recoup job losses, but more importantly to rehabilitate the economy and help our hardest hit sectors . Through the COVID-19 Assistance to Restart Enterprises or CARES Program, we released 988 million pesos worth of loans to over 14,000 enterprises Bayanihan 1. Bayanihan 2, we released 2.9 billion pesos worth of loans to over 12,000 enterprises including our displaced OFWs and. Enterprises in the tourism sector to help them or sustain their businesses amid the pandemic. Along this line, I would to renew my call to Congress to immediately pass the amendments of priority legislative measures such as the Foreign Investments Act, the Public Service Act, and the Retail Trade Liberalization Act. Your applause went ahead of its realization. You have to work on this guys and I am sure that we can have a respite of this contagion in a — in your own little way. Finally, I would to reiterate my call for Congress again to pass legislation to establish a single agency that shall focus on and respond quickly to the needs and concerns of our OFWs. I pray that our next leaders and our future generations will not squander our natural resources and fight for the integrity of our environment, in a manner fiercer and more effective than my administration had ever done. The pandemic has taken from us as a nation but other adversities that tested us time and again, it can never take our courage and resilience. And the spirit of Bayanihan 1 — , bayanihan and the value of malasakit are now indelible in us Filipinos. We shall use these gifts to forge ahead towards a better normal. As we come to a point where the risk of COVID-19 transmission can, to a certain extent, be managed, I am hopeful that we shall be united in forging ahead towards bringing the country back to its robust growth path. Let me end by adding these particular statements. , on learning — education and learning. Despite our inability to conduct face-to-face classes during this pandemic, we remain determined to deliver quality and accessible education to all. The creation of the Basic Education Learning Continuity Plan enabled the uninterrupted learning of students in the basic education sector while ensuring their and teachers' health, safety, and being. While the pandemic has demonstrated the readiness, resourcefulness and capability of government to serve the Filipino people through the use of ICT and digital services, it has also shown its inherent deficiencies and weaknesses. As such I ask Congress to pass an E-Governance Act that will set up the transition of government processes to the digital age. I would to add something on the protection of our overseas Filipinos. I also ask Congress to pass a law creating the Department of Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos — kailangan po ito because they are suffering not on — they suffered not only yesterday but they are still suffering now with many inadequacies, in both our government response including the monetary assistance — to ensure that there is a department that is solely focused on addressing the needs and taking care of the welfare of our countrymen abroad. Before I end, let me also touch on the environmental protection. It has also been 13 years since the Supreme Court, through a mandamus, ordered the rehabilitation of Manila Bay. Unfortunately, no immediate substantial action to comply with the Supreme Court's order was undertaken until 2019, when this administration started its long overdue rehabilitation. As of May , all illegally operating open dumpsites surrounding Manila Bay have been shut down, while 151 out of 187 LGUs surrounding the Bay now have access to sanitary landfills. Establishments have been forced to comply with environmental laws and ordinances while those who did not have been closed down. As a result, pollutants have been reduced and coliform levels — also reduced to its barest maximum — are now on its lowest levels in years if not decades. I urge the DENR to sustain its efforts and continue working with our LGUs to restore Manila Bay to its former glory. You know, one little thing before we end. Iyong pag-ano sa Manila Bay, , there is a corner where all the garbage con — by current — by action of the current, nandito marami sa likod ng Luneta. Ginawa natin 'yan at nilagay natin itong 'yung puting bato na which is, , scattered into small pieces. Eh nawawala minsan 'yan because of the waves. Every now and then, we still have to replenish because we cannot change the nature of our shores. That is how it is. It is not a permanent fixture there, . It is there from the mountains and we break it down and bring it to the sea. But that would occupy that place irrespective of there is a high tide or low tide. Nakakatulong 'yan at nawawala 'yan. And the only way to do it is to replenish it until we can think of a good alternative of how we can process the whole thing back to its normalcy. If there was normalcy at the time or at any other time in the past. On the resilience. Again, dinagdag ko na lang ito. Time is good and as any other time again to ask you. In line with this, we hope to pursue the creation of public entities dedicated to managing emerging and re-emerging diseases. I thus fervently ask Congress to enact a law creating the Center for Disease Prevention and Control and the Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines. We must… Maski gaano natin kahirap, however poor we are I think that the Filipinos, given the proper support and the there, the equipment that they have to use, we can — I am sure that the Filipino brain can also process or make vaccines in the future. Tapos na po 'yan, ma'am. I ask Congress to pass the — 'yan — Disaster Resilience Act that will create the Department of Disaster Resilience. Let us also — pagkatapos nito, ma'am, ikaw 'yung unang tao na mag-congratulate sa akin ha. Kaya ako nagka-utal-utal dito eh dahil sa iyo. Let us also pass the law implementing the Fire Protection Modernization Program to bolster the readiness of our firefighters and ensure their ability to respond to fires and disasters. Related to this… Importante 'yang trabaho ng bumbero maniwala kayo. They must also be there during any disaster happening. Let us also push for the Mandatory Establishment of Evacuation Centers in every city, province and municipality throughout the country, which shall provide the basic needs and assistance to all evacuees during times of emergency. Now, there is now the conclusion. Sabi, "Hay, salamat." Sabi, " P*****g Duterte 'to oh.". The lights go out for this administration eleven months from now. The work that we started and expected to finish within the constitutional time frame of six years has been stalled. Was hoped for. But we need not despair. Desperation is a feeling alien to the resilient Filipino. A peaceful and prosperous Philippines is no longer a distant dream but one that is within our grasp if our future Filipinos would also do it — if would continue the — if they would continue and would seize the opportunity to work together. Malaki ang pasasalamat ng mga kababayan natin at lagi nilang sinasabi na mas panatag ang loob nila ngayon. Hindi na nababahala ang mga magulang na lumalabas ang mga anak nila at naglalakad sa gabi. I will not elaborate on anything. You can draw your conclusion. Alam mo, when the Filipino, a father, a mother, or a child, naglalakad sa gabi at siya ay — kagaya ng iba, even in America, you go into the inner cities of L.A. and New York, you — sa Washington D.C., there's a corner there, there's a. — do not go there because you will not come out alive. Ganoon, kung hindi maglakad na sila puro takot na lang ang nasa loob nila ma-holdup sa jeep tapos pati 'yung taga Ombudsman na buntis patay pa pati 'yung bata sa loob ng tiyan. To get the money to buy shabu because when the monkey is riding on your back, iyong katawan mo hindi mo na maano, that is why you need to higop — sip, kailangan mo maghigop at kailangan mo pumatay 'pag wala kang pera. Hindi naman talagang papatay, not. The mind is not ready for that but in the struggle, you put up a struggle if you are the owner of the money, eh talagang papatayin ka 'pag hindi mo ibigay. Iyan ang ayaw ko kaya noong na-mayor ako sa Davao, ganito, mga p***** i** — mga p****** i** niyo, umalis kayo sa daan, 'yung daan, 'yung public transportation is for public good. Huwag mo silang takutin na magkanto 'pag uwi, nandiyan nag-iinuman sa — iyan ang hilig ng Pilipinong. — mag-inuman. Hindi mo malaman ang mga nag-uwi na babae, they have to take another route that would be longer because nandiyan mga istambay. The streets are unsafe, hino-holdup, pinapatay. Sabi ko doon sa Davao. Sa Davao na lang, huwag na lang ako dito sa Maynila, hindi naman talaga ako nakikialam dito pero alam nila, alam ng pulis kung ano ang gusto ko. Mag-prangkahan tayo. Sabi ko sa pulis, "Isauli mo 'yan." The roads, the highways are for law-abiding citizens of this country. Iyong mga kriminal, 'yung mga — , the dregs of society, huwag ninyong gamitin 'yang mga daan, hindi para sa inyo 'yan. And I will see to it that you are not there, be sure that when I pass by, I do not see you. Because if I see you, I will dance with you. Isauli ko. Kaya ngayon medyo hindi naman talaga ano but 'yung mga sales girl ng mga — mga shopping center eh panatag na ang loob nila at least ang chances of being mugged, murdered, and raped. Iyan ang ayaw ko. 'Pag malayo nakahigop na, kunin 'yung pera, hilain doon sa medyo maliit na mga grassy portion and rape at papatayin. Iyan ang hindi ko matanggap. 'yang Pilipino sabi ko… I may be — I may be a little bit crazier than the others but that is what I am. Ayaw ko 'yung — lalo na mag — mag-shabu ka tapos mag-pasyal ka kung ano wala kang makuhang pera, aakyat ka ng bahay. That bank teller, it was raining hard the rains that we had experienced. It was pouring almost cats and , ang lakas talaga nang bagsak ng ulan. She went home to knock the door and pump the door loud but ang parents nilang matanda — matanda na 'yung parents, hindi nakarinig. Anong ginawa nitong ma — mga sa construction workers? Sabi ko diyan nga ako galit sa droga eh. Nabibili nila mura. It's 200, 300, susuyupin nila at 'pag nakasuyop ng droga 'yan, maghanap ng alcohol 'yan. Sigurado 'yan. 'Pag tama ng alcohol pati 'yung ano ng droga it shrinks the brain, 'yon. Iyong babae dinampot — she was picked up and brought to the construction site near the house tapos ni-rape doon, pinatay, sinunog pa. Iyan ang hindi ko talaga maintindihan. I cannot reco… Iyong bata na 3-year-old rape-in mo. Ang problema nito, ang nakikita nila ang patay na mga kriminal, how about the victims on the other side? Bakit hindi ninyo tingnan and see what these criminals have done to our children, to our wives, and daughters? May listahan kayo p**… Ang listahan ninyo doon sa namatay hindi ba kayo maligaya niyan wala ng kriminal? Pero 'pag tingin mo dito ilan ang patay na inosente? Pati pulis ko at sundalo namamatay diyan baka akala ninyo kriminal lang. That is my lamentations and I want you to hear. In my five years in office, we made change in governance through the reforms we pursued. However, for this governance — must be sustained and broadened. We need to make… I'm not — I'm getting my air. Naghihingal ako. Baka — baka dito ako mamatay pagka-Presidente. Iba na ang pitik ng ano ko ngayon ng kasing-kasing ko. Kasing-kasing is puso. To make every public servant responsive to the needs of the people and enjoin every Filipino to assert their to demand malasakit from their leaders until everyone lives with dignity — fed, educated, healthy, secure, disciplined, and empowered — to contribute to national development. I will not be forever be President. But ang kulang sa Pilipino is assertiveness. 'Pag may — mayroon kayong transaction at hingian kayo, ang sabi ko sa inyo, ito ang payo ko, murahin mo, sabihin mo, "P***** i** ka, nagtatrabaho kayo at kami dito. We are following papers and you are sitting on your a** on it.". Kaya dito, sabi ko, makinig kayong lahat ng Pilipino tutal last SONA ko na ito, 'pag may mag-follow up kayo, permit, clearance, at maghingi ng pera, murahin ninyo. Sabihin ninyo, "'Yan, sabi ni Duterte sampalin ko kayo kasi ako nagbabayad ng buwis, bakit ginaganito ninyo?". And to the mga Pilipino, hindi naman lahat, tayong nagtatrabaho sa gobyerno, I mean it takes you one month to process a paper, it takes you — tapos pabalik-balik 'yung tao. 'Pag ang tao bumabalik, dalawa, isa, tatlo, then there is corruption there. Murahin mo, at kung maaari, pahiramin kita ng pangkulam para kulamin mo. Ganoon talaga. I'm warning everybody, there's still one year to go. In Davao, three days. Lagyan mo ng papel, "Bumalik ka dito at this hour on Thursday." At pagka naipakita mo 'yung papel, hanapin niyo 'yung ibibigay. Iyan ang gamitin ninyo, for all the local governments also. In my Cabinet, it's 30 days, walang extension. All. Sabi ko, you reduce the signing authority from six, seven, to only one or two. Hindi naman pala kailangan… Hindi kailangan magpirma lahat ng empleyado diyan, one or two. Iyong iba mag-process lang. But if you cannot process it also in many days, in Davao, if you sub — if it is a clearance, which is long overdue, hindi mo na puwedeng ibigay doon sa tao. Ibigay mo sa akin at tanungin kita, "… mo, bakit inabot ka ng ganito?" Wala — there is no other conclusion. Corruption 'yan. Kagaya… What is true in Davao is true for the entire Philippines. Mabuti't na rin 'yan nakapagsalita ako ng freely with you tutal last ko naman na itong SONA. Mabuti 'yang malaman ng tao na ganoon ang ginagawa nila. It's not there. Hindi man — hindi man nila lalagay 'yang mga ganoon na, wala mang mura diyan. Be careful this is… We need to fight to subdue narrow vested interests and ensure that our gains will to the benefit of the greater number of Filipinos, those who have the least in life. We have laid down the groundwork and are continuing to push for landmark reforms and key accomplishments up to the last days of my term. I have full confidence that the Filipino spirit… Pati ako nagmamadali na. Eh naiihi na kanina pa eh. It's a natural human biology what's the big deal? Bakit kayo magpakpak kung napaihi na ako? Sabagay, alam ko rin, nahihiya kayong magtindig. Puno ang pila nito pagdating sa CR mamaya. I have full confidence that the Filipino spirit will persevere and triumph. Together, let us rise as a nation. Thank you. Thank you. Please allow me a little bit of informality at the outset. You would realize that the three guys in the elevated portion of Congress are from Mindanao. , wala na talaga kaming masabi. Senate President Aquilino Pimentel III, Members of the Senate, Speaker Pantaleon Alvarez and the Members of the House of Representatives, Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo, President Fidel Valdez Ramos, President Joseph Ejercito Estrada, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno and the Justices of Supreme Court, His Excellency Papal Nuncio and members of the diplomatic corps. Of course, I have also to greet the Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea, the members of the Cabinet, fellow workers in government, my countrymen. We cannot move forward if we allow the past to pull us back. Finger-pointing is not the way. That is why I will not waste precious time dwelling on the sins of the past or blaming those who are perceived to be responsible for the mess that we are in and suffering from. Except to extract a lesson or two from its errors, we will not tarry because it is the present that we are concerned with and the future that we should be prepared for. Lest I be misunderstood, let me say , that those who betrayed the people's trust shall not go unpunished and they will have their day in Court. And if the evidence warrants, they will have their day of reckoning . When I decided to seek the presidency of this republic, I knew what the ills of our country were; I knew their causes; and I was briefed on those who caused the causes. I heard the people on the streets complain that justice had become illusory; that equity and fairness and speedy disposition of cases had deteriorated into hollow concepts fit only for masteral dissertations. It was, and still is, sad indeed. As a former prosecutor, I know that there are ways of knowing how fast or how slow cases go. What I did was to look into the number of postponements and the time difference between each postponement and the next setting. It was simple as that. I will appreciate deeply if we all in government attend to this urgent need. I was determined then as I am now determined and better now positioned, to wage war against those who make a mockery of our laws including those who make life for us all miserable. I wish to assure everyone though that vindictiveness is not in my system. You and I, all equal treatment and equal protection are what I ask for our people. But we must have the courage to fight for what we believe in, undeterred by the fear of failing or losing. Indeed, courage knows no limits, cowardice does. At this point, there are concerns few I wish to convey to all to the end that as I perorate on facts, figures, plans, programs, and solutions, these concerns will not dissipate or get lost along our way. Thus to our religious, bishops, leaders, priests, pastors, preachers, imams let me assure you that while I am a stickler for the principle of separation between Church and State, I believe that there should never be a separation between God and State. During my inauguration last (June) 30, 2016, I said that the fight against criminality and illegal drugs and corruption will be relentless and sustained. I reiterate that commitment today, and that is why I call on the Philippine National Police, the barangay chairmen, the Mayors, the Governors and all those occupying seats of power and authority, not to lower their guard. There will be no let-up in this campaign. Double your efforts. Triple them, if need be. We will not stop until the last drug lord, the last financier, and the last pusher have surrendered or put behind bars or below the ground, if they wish. To our police officers and other officials, do your job and you will have the unwavering support of the Office of the President. I will be with you all the way. Abuse your authority, and there will be a hell to pay, for you will have become worse than criminality itself. I order the National Police Commission (NAPOLCOM) to hasten the conduct of investigation and adjudication of administrative cases against police officers involved in criminal activities and illegal activities and prescribe policies on lifestyle checks for PNP members. In this quest, I will put at stake my honor, my life, and the presidency itself. The DILG is also directed to strictly monitor how LGUs perform their supervision functions over the police and those found not performing will be sanctioned including the loss of police deputation from the NAPOLCOM. Let me repeat my warning to all. I repeat my repeat, my repeat to all, do not do drugs because you will be the solution to the drug crisis that has engulfed, "malawak" the nation. We will create an Inter-Agency Committee on Illegal Drugs that will integrate efforts and strengthen the partnership of all stakeholders. The reservists will be mobilized for information campaign against drug use and the dissemination of information regarding drug rehabilitation programs being offered by the government. Let us also strengthen our ROTC Program to instill love of country and good citizenship. We will also prioritize the rehabilitation of drug users. We will increase the number of residential treatment and rehabilitation facilities in all regions of the country. The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) will facilitate the preparations for the use of military camps and facilities for drug rehabilitation. There can never be , tangible and felt development without making our people feel secure. And it is our duty to uplift the people's welfare. With this, my administration shall be sensitive to the State's obligations to promote and protect, and fulfil the rights of our citizens, the poor, the marginalized and the vulnerable and social justice shall be pursued, even as the rule of law shall at all times prevail. My administration shall implement a human approach to development and governance, as we improve our people's welfare in the areas of health, education, adequate food and housing, environmental preservation, and respect for culture. Human rights must work to uplift human dignity. But human rights cannot be used as a shield or an excuse to destroy the country - your country and my country. Meantime, since our country continues to be confronted with internal security threats aggravated by the existence and activities of the terrorist group Abu Sayyaf Group, the full force of the AFP will be applied to crush these criminals who operate under the guise of religious fervor. The AFP shall enhance its capability to search and engage these rogue and lawless elements. We have to strengthen our coordination with Indonesia and Malaysia to suppress the kidnapping in the waters of our neighboring countries. We will strengthen our counter-terrorism programs by amending various laws on human terrorism, terrorism financing and cybercrime. This is our answer to the challenges of the global developments on the non-traditional threats, transnational crimes and fanatical terrorism. Addressing global warming shall also be our top priority, but upon a fair and equitable equation. It must not stymie our industrialization. We must also endeavor to develop and cultivate partnerships with nations sharing common interests and concerns with the Philippines; maintain and sustain bilateral and multilateral consultations and dialogues. We will continue to expand cooperation on human assistance and disaster response, maritime security and counter terrorism. We shall deepen security dialogues with other nations to build greater understanding and cooperation. With regard to the West Philippine Sea, otherwise known as China Sea, we affirm and respect the outcome of the case before the Permanent Court of Arbitration as an important contribution to the ongoing efforts to pursue a peaceful resolution and management of our disputes. On the aspect of our peace processes relating to our engagement with the international community, the Philippines shall remain committed to continue thorough working with our international partners achieving lasting peace and progress in the country. We will vigorously address the grievances that have been time and again expressed, not only by the Bangsamoro, indigenous peoples and other groups for security, development, fair access to decision-making and acceptance of identities. Enduring peace can only be attained only if we meet these fundamental needs of every man, woman and child. To our Muslim brothers, the Moro country and the members of the CPP/NPA/NDF, let me say this:. All of us want peace, not the peace of the dead, but the peace of the living. We express our willingness and readiness to go to the negotiating table, and yet we load our guns, fix our sights, pull the trigger. It is both ironic and tragic and it is endless. While we extol the bravery and heroism of our soldiers, kayo, the rebels, do the same for your members and fighters. What I see instead are the widows and the orphans and I feel their pain and grieve, and no amount of cash assistance or the number of medals can compensate the loss of a human life. Sorrow cuts across every stratum of society. It cuts deeply and the pain lasts forever. That is why I reach out to all of you today. To our Muslim brothers, let us find, let us end the centuries of mistrust and warfare. To the CPP/NPA/NDF, let us end these decades of ambuscades and skirmishes. We are going nowhere, and it is getting bloodier by the day. To immediately stop violence on the ground, restore peace in the communities and provide an enabling environment conducive to the resumption of the peace talks. I am now announcing a unilateral ceasefire with the CPP/NPA/NDF effective immediately, and call on our Filipinos in the National Democratic Front and its forces to respond accordingly. Let me make this appeal to you: "If we cannot, as yet, love one another, then in God's name, let us not hate each other ," it was said. I say the same to you today. We will strive to have a permanent and lasting peace before my term ends. That is my goal. That is my dream. On the macroeconomic management, my administration will continue and maintain current macroeconomic policies, and even do better. We will achieve this through prudent fiscal and monetary policies that can help translate high growth into more and better job creation and poverty reduction. By the end of my term, I hope and pray to hand over an economy that is stronger, characterized by solid growth, low and stable inflation, dollar reserves, and robust fiscal position. On taxation, my administration will pursue tax reforms towards a simpler and more equitable and more efficient tax system that can foster investment and job creation. We will lower personal and corporate income tax rates and relax the Bank Secrecy Law. Eh nag-Presidente ako. Ayaw ko sanang makialam dito, sa mga ito. Alam mo na. , may I continue. At the household level, there must be sufficient income for all Filipinos to meet the basic food and non-food needs of their families. We shall continue to attract investments that will generate thousands of jobs each year - jobs that are suitable for the poor and less skilled members of the workforce. Reforms to ensure competitiveness and promote ease of doing business will be mandatory. Relaxing restrictions on the economy will be needed to make more investments to come and to develop labor-intensive industries such as manufacturing, agriculture and tourism shall be pursued. We must also invest in human capital and ensure equal access to economic opportunities. The implementation of the Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Law must be put into full force and effect that couples, the poor, would have freedom of informed choice on the number and spacing of children they can adequately care and provide for, eventually making them more productive members of the labor force. When employment is not an option, for instance in rural neighborhoods, entrepreneurship will be advocated. We shall also enhance local business environment by addressing bottlenecks in business registration and processing, streamlining investment application process and integration of the services of various government offices. Government Financial Institutions (GFIs) shall come up with out-of-the box financing packages to capacitate our small and medium entrepreneurs. In the field of tourism, we shall construct more access roads and tourism gateways to service centers and tourist sites. Road development projects shall complement with the thrust to provide modern agriculture infrastructure, expanding and improving the construction and rehabilitation of road and the irrigation and establishing modern harvest and post-harvest facilities to minimize losses. We shall also conduct a nationwide soil analysis to determine areas suitable for rice farming to optimize production with the use of effective soil rehabilitation and fertilization. We shall strictly enforce fisheries laws, on illegal fishing and promote aquaculture along river banks and in backyards. On the other hand, we will accelerate infrastructure spending by improving national roads and bridges and implementing the Mindanao Logistics Infrastructure Network and other road network master plans. We shall pursue inter-island linkage projects. We shall be implementing structural mitigation to address the perennial flooding In Metro Manila and neighboring areas. We shall put up new pumping stations in strategic places. The revival of the operation of the Pasig River Ferry Service System is a viable option for the severe traffic congestion in Metro Manila. This serves as an alternative mode of transportation for passengers those coming from the east side of Metro to reach specific destinations within the cities of Manila, Mandaluyong, Pasig, Taguig, Marikina and Quezon City. Our anti-colorum campaign and out-of-line apprehension, including the removal of terminals will be intensified. And my God, it will be done immediately, immediately. To address lack of road infrastructure in Metro Manila, usage of existing roads will be maximized. Thus, there is a need to cooperate and coordinate with LGUs to map out secondary routes and to consult with various stakeholders, including the public transport operators. Many in government realistically opine, that I would have to agree, that the worsening traffic situation could be logically addressed, if Congress would also accord emergency powers to the agencies concerned. Ayaw mo? Lang din. Pakita namin kung gusto ninyong madalian. Alam naman talaga ninyo sagad na lahat. Sagad na. Nasa inyo iyan. If you give it, fine. If you don't give, we'll take the longer route, slowly. And tanggapin ko iyong pagmumura ninyo, huwag lang sa malapit. Eh ganoon talaga eh… it's an urgent and immediate situation, solution. Gusto ninyo madali. 'Pag ayaw naman ninyo, because baka sabihin ninyo graft and corruption naman, 'di rin. I assure wala ito sa script… I assure you, this will be a clean government. If that is the only worry that you have, and I can understand your misgiving. Wala na ito sa… haba… wala na ito sa script. You know, ako makagarantiya, 101% it will be clean. Problem is I can only act through agencies and departments. That's why I urge you na maski konting mali lang, wala akong ano doon… wala na akong politika, wala na. I'm through, after this. I pass on to you the information that, you know, I act through Secretary and everything, I cannot guarantee their honesty and competence at all times. Cabinet members, yes. Pero iyong sa baba - procurement, iyong mag bidding diyan… but as far as I can relate… malinis talaga ito. Napag-usapan namin sa likod about the federal system. You know, my advice to you is: maintain a federal system, a parliament, but be sure to have a President. Huwag, hindi na ako niyan, I'm disqualified and by that time I would no longer be here. But I can commit today, to the Republic of the Philippines and its people, if you hurry up the federal system of government and you can submit it to the Filipino people by the fourth, fifth year - kasi proseso 'yan eh. You call for a referendum and after that call a presidential election, I will go. Sibat na ako. But you must have a president. You copy the France system. Huwag mong hayaan 'yang puro na parliament, delikado yan. It takes time even for the-iyong kagaya ng England 'no, because of this bomb on the double deck, took them time because there is no one apparatus for the Commander-In-Chief down. You cannot be president, you can elect. Tito Sotto will be a lucky guy at the time. Oh 'di, limitahan mo lang. Ceremonial powers, power to dissolve, power to offset the resolution or . Mandating you this, do that… or ceremonial powers, except in times of need. If there's a demand for action, you must have a president. Wala na ako niyon. I said if you can give me that document, I will urge you to conduct, to order a… call for an election the following day, following week. And even if there's still two years, three years, I will go. Na ako. Do not worry about me. I am into… that's ambitious. Eh nanalo pa eh. Hindi ko nga alam kung bakit ngayon, noon nandoon lang ako oh. Totoo man. Sino ba nagsuporta sa akin dito? Wala man. Not a single congressman, except for two provinces, governor. Iyon lang. Wala akong barangay captain, wala akong… wala lahat. Pero ngayon… Processing time in issuing permits and licenses shall be reduced to the barest minimum. In my city, it is always three days for local government. That will bind the Office of the President down to the last. Barangay. Three days, three days, local government. Business permit, clearances-hindi, teka lang. No follow up. Bigyan mo ng stub, be back next week, tignan mo iyong work load and I will require every department, iyong dito sa itaas, they must have a logbook. Huwag sa computer, , itong ganito na-i- erase 'yan. Ilagay mo day, time, I accept the document of Rodrigo Duterte, then go to your computer. You must have an actuarial projection there. Look at the work load, napakabobo mo naman… oh ilan ang work load ninyo, tapos pag bumalik ka dito August 3, o'clock, ibigay mo, ibigay mo. Ngayon I will be establishing 8888 only for, dedicated to corruption. Pag may marinig ako sa Executive Department, even a whisper, even a whisper, hiwalay-hiwalay na tayo. Marami diyan sa, diyan sa gallery, marami diyan walang trabaho, nag-a-apply hanggang ngayon. Hindi naman lahat kasi mayayaman iyan eh, mga asawa ninyo ata iyan. While the issuance and distribution of motor vehicle plates at point of sale or through motor vehicle dealers shall be considered. Wag na sa LTO kasi hanggang ngayon, panahon pa ni Hesukristo iyong first plate nila hanggang ngayon wala pa. Bayad na iyon, until now sa awa ng Diyos. For the driver's licenses, its effectiveness will be extended from the current 3-year period to 5 years. To reduce queuing time at ticketing stations, tickets sa mga train will be made readily available and accessible to the riding public kung bilhin mo iyan sa malls, stalls and stores, ipinagbibili mo iyon sa… di diyan mo na ibigay, accredited. Wag doon banda sa Recto kasi sigurado pekein iyan ng mga ulol. May I address again to the Filipino. Ako po ay doble ang pagod para sa inyo, para sa kapakanan ng bayan. Seryoso po ako. Kayong mga ganoon, tiket-tiket at magkaroon ng gulo, huwag ho ninyong gawain iyan. Ito na iyong warning ko, yun ang last. Wala ng iba, hindi ko na gagawin uli. Wag ninyong sirain iyong mga bagay-bagay na ginagawa namin para sa kapakanan ng tao. Mabuti iyang magkaintindihan tayo. Kaya wag ninyong gawin. Simple lang iyan eh. Para walang away sa gobyerno 'yung mga bagay na illegal at masama at hindi tama, wag mong gawin at hindi kami mag-aaway dito. Pati iyong pari, pati si Pope tinamaan. Let us be clear with each other, I am for the comfort and the welfare of the Filipinos. Kayo namang hindi pa bungog dyan, hindi pa pumasok iyang mga droga, kung ayaw ninyong mamatay, ayaw ninyong masaktan, wag kayong umasa diyan sa mga pari, pati human rights, hindi nakakapigil 'yan ng kamatayan. , wag ninyong gawin. Eh tapos nandiyan ka nakabulagta and you are portrayed in a broadsheet na parang Mother Mary cradling the dead cadaver of Jesus Christ. Ayan ang mga yan eh. Magdadramahan pa tayo dito. Dito ako nakatingin kasi nandito iyong public eh. Alam mo ilang beses ko nang sinasabi yan, kunyari sa Davao, huwag mong gawin kasi magkakaproblema tayo. He who is the cause of the cause is the cause of them all. Ikaw iyong nag-umpisa, you swallow-ulitin ko ha, he who is the cause of the cause is the cause of them all. Kami nagtatrabaho lang. We have a nation to guard. We have millions of people to see that they are healthy. It's a question of drugs, it's a question of public interest, public order. Kita mo lesser crimes, wala na kasing magnanakaw, wala na nag-holdap. Kasi para yan-bakit itatapon sabi nila eh maliliit lang iyan. Gamitin mo utak mo. If you are able to contaminate, kagaya ng negosyo ng mga Chinese, wholesale yan sila. Maski konti-konti, kung the whole ng Tondo contaminated, pera yan. I am not saying…the Chinese the practice of itong wholesale/retail. They go wholesale, maski na kumita lang isang piso dyan, na iyan. Kasi paramihan eh. Yan ang ibig kong sabihin. I hope the military and the police will not react on this…it's part of the deep intelligence that we gathered. I am forced to come and in public kasi iyong mga pari nag-aano. Alam mo, kayong mga media, naghanap kayo ng, "Where is the big fish?" Saan iyong bilyonaryo na mayaman, iyong mga may kotse, may mga Mercedes. Ma'am nandoon yan sila sa labas, wala dito. Magdala ka ng isang battalion na police para hulihin natin doon, kung kaya natin. They direct the traffic of drugs sa kanila. Meron silang ganito, malaki, time nakikinig sila ngayon dito. I am 101 percent nakikinig sila dito. Saan doon? Doon lang. Isosoli nila sa Tondo, o itapon mo diyan, tapos umalis ka kunin sa tindahan yung bag o package. Di ba sabi mo nakikita ng media na… kayo lang ang nagba-brand niyan na drug lord eh. Those are not the drug lords, mga lieutenant, delivery boy yan. Kung baga LBC lang yan, pati DHL, Federal. Pati iyong tawag nilang basura, iyon yung street ano-huwag kayong maghanap. Gusto ninyo sabihin ko sa inyo, puntahan natin. I will give you the names. I'll show you the intelligence paper. Pero give me the guarantee na may gawain ka. Kasi I will give you the name, I'll give you country, kung wala pa ring gagawa mag-shotgun tayo-kaya hindi lang kami 'no. We do not get personal about our work here. I am saying that I-dito oh, balik na tayo. Kasi iyong hindi nakakaintindi na mga Tagalog, ano na iyong, tagal naman nitong. Passenger capacity congestion shall be addressed by increasing the number of running trains from the current 16 trains with a total of 48 cars per hour, to 20 trains with a total of 60 cars per hour; increase train speed from 40 (kph) to 60 (kph). Ang problema nito, iyong mga railways-hindi na ito kasali diyan; huwag kayong maniwala dito. Two-thirds of this are mine, the other third is korek iyong grammar ko. Ayaw lang nila. Sixty kilometer per hour, problema nito, and you must agree with me that the rails are aged. Of the rails . Noon pa 'yan sa panahon ni Marcos, Imelda. Nandiyan pa. Ngayon, sabi ni Tugade, "Sir, magbigay sa akin, sabihin ko 40 to 60 kilometers per hour." Sabihin ko, "Art, sigurado ka maka-hold ang rail niyan? Baka maputol iyan, magdiretso yung tren sa Cavite. Dumiretso sa Cavite, maglipad, doon kay Tolentino, 'Oh, bakit may tren dito sa Tagaytay?" It's fast, fast, 60 kilometres per hour and you're pulling something that is heavy. When it moves … mawalan ng ano … it moves with the speed at a heavy thing at a great speed, mahirap mong … sumasadsad kasi mabigat eh. And reduce headway time from 5 minutes to 3 minutes. Mahina lang tayo ng - ang plano ni Tugade, mahina lang tayo ng one minute sa Hong Kong. Two minutes, kaniya three minutes eh. Art, ambisyoso ka. Kaya mo kaya ito? For the LRT, the operating hours shall be extended from to PM. Marami pang mga bata ang uuwi niyan. And to absorb more passengers, delays in the procurement of additional trains shall be addressed soonest. Now, iyan ang sinasabi ko. If you want to know me, fine. Wala akong problema. Sabihin ninyo na doon ang … we go the normal way. If you're able to make purchases. Ang maganda nito, I have signed the Executive Order sa aming FOI. Naunahan ko kayo. Yung inyo nandoon na sa akin. Oo, tapos na ako kaya ilabas ko na. It will be out today. Alam ninyo, sabi ko, unahan ko ang Congress puro mayayabang ang ano diyan. We grab the… stealing one's thunder. Unahan na natin. We shall also pursue rail projects in Metro Manila and the major key-points in the country including the Mindanao Rail Project. Hindi ako nagyayabang pero totoo talaga ito. We're in the depende sa federal but six years, lalabas talaga ito I assure you because it's going to materialize. Rail projects, Davao Transit System, the Cebu Transit System, the North and South Luzon Railways and the Panay Railways project. Panay! Eh taga-saan si ano, di Panay. Panay ang bigay natin para-sabihin naman ni Senator Drilon, bina-backbite ka dito. Lalagyan daw ang island ng train. May tawa pa. Bina-backbite ka dito. Magsumbong man iyan. Tingnan mo, tan-awa diha. Different approaches are also being considered to decongest NAIA including the possible transfer of general aviation. Ang style ko kasi, ganito, hindi naman ako … I am not steeped into formalities. Itong trans-general aviation, alam n'yo kung sino ang tamaan niyan? Kayong mayayaman. Kayong may mga helicopter, pati eroplano, ilipat ko kayo. Alam mo iyong general aviation, iyong mga Lear Jet, iyong sa mga kumpaniya, ilagay ko kayo sa Batanes para wala masyadong air traffic. No. I'm offering Sangley Point. Kasi tayuan ko isang runway 'yan. I can make a new runway there. Sabi ng mga aviation experts, but tumbok niyan is the Merville Subdivision. Maka isa pa akong runway dito sa Metro Manila. But if not there, it's going to be Clark but on a condition that you have a fast rail. Sabi ko kay Art, it is something thirty. One hour of travel, sabi ko kay Tugade, is not acceptable. Make a rail there, bago, marami pa. The bow of the day is bullet train. Ilagay mo iyan sa Pilipino na drayber, sa point ko, hilo. Maglampas kayo dito. The Clark Airport can be utilized to shift some operations of our domestic and international airlines. Moreover, a one-stop shop will be established within the Clark civil aviation complex for the benefit of the Overseas Filipinos. Ito mangyari na ito. To utilize the Clark Airport, it is necessary to establish iyong mga … you have a rail to connect. In the area of environment, the military is directed to intensify its makinig kayo, sige gitawa diyan - its support role against illegal logging, illegal mining - andiyan pa naman si Gina Lopez - and other destructive practices that aggravate the devastation of our natural resources. I have to protect the country. Many are complaining against the appointment of Gina Lopez. But si Gina, pati ako, we share the same paradigm: the interest of the country must come first. But hindi ko naman sinasabi-there's a law allowing mining. Gina Lopez and I are telling you, follow government standards. Do not destroy the environment. Follow it to a T, wala tayong problema. Pay the correct taxes; follow the standards. Gina Lopez is doing her job. You know she is a crusader. Iyan ang … that is how I describe her persona: Crusader. Kaya sabi ko tama iyan. Bakit? Nandiyan ba si Ma'am Gina Lopez, Secretary Lopez? Ganito iyan. Pumunta siya sa Davao, gabi na mga 1 o'clock, because on the early days of my … when I won but hindi pa ako nag-oath. Marami na nagpuntahan - solicitation, congratulations. Eh si Ma'am, pumunta twice. Every time, she shows me the degradation of … ito na nga. Tapos dalawang oras naman, mukhang hindi na matapos. Sabi ko, "Ma'am, do not be offended." Totoo man, wag kang magagalit kay it's the truth. Mag-a-alas tres na, "Rody, this one 'no." Tapos extemporaneous na, para ring congressman. Sabi ko, "Ma'am, mag-a-alas kuwatro, Ma'am. Ano kaya kung ikaw na lang ang DENR?" Bigla din siyang nag-sagot, "Totoo ka?" Sabi ko, "Umm…" Hindi yung, "oo." Siya, siya, "I will ask the"…you know, "I'll consult my family and ask my… ano nila.". Following day, tawag siya kay, my aide, kay Bong. Sabi niya, "Bong, na tinanggap na. Sabi ng pamilya ko, na." Sabi ko, "Haay, bantay ka sa … But you know, I would not be appointing somebody who is alien to my thinking. I would take in somebody who shares my horizons in life, iyong degradation …. Tama iyan, she's a crusader and she will continue. The DENR is likewise directed to review all permits granted to the mining, logging and other environmental sensitive activities, ensure compliance with government standards and if warranted ito na iyong pinakamaganda - amend, suspend or revoke permits. Go ahead. I'd to thank God that I had this opportunity. I never… wala namang ano, I never thought umabot ako dito. I've always had that crank sa isip ko mahirap itong ano. Gaya itong Laguna Lake, naubos ng mga… wala na ang fishermen. Yun na lang the difference between one big fish pen to the other, iyon na lang ang sa mga tao. Makita mo… sa plane, every time I go to Davao and I pass by that place there. Every time, nakita ko talagang wala nang ano. And the fishermen are complaining about the loss. Talagang wala na sila. Kasi ang maliit na lugar, iyon lang ang kanila. Dito pinadaan ko lang in a diplomatic way that the Laguna Lake shall be transformed into a vibrant economic zone showcasing ecotourism by addressing the negative impact of a watershed destruction, land conversion and pollution. Ito ang nilagay ko. This is what I'm telling you - the poor fishermen will have priority in its entitlements. Order to Gina is, "Ayusin mo, Ma'am." Huwag mo namang ipitin, but they have to reduce the areas of occupation. They cannot have their cake and eat it . Sila na iyong may pera, this must stop. Kung sakaling itanong sa iyo kung sino ang may ari niyan, simple lang - mga General, mga Mayor, Governor, baka Congressman. I mean, this is not personal. This is something which I feel that I must do, because it is the thing to do. To have adequate disposal facility for the Metro Manila garbage, the final closure and rehabilitation of the Carmona Sanitary Landfill shall be pursued while the adoption of appropriate waste-to-energy facilities will be explored. Marami iyan, the technology is coming and fast. In the area of governance there is a need to strengthen our efforts along this line. To better manage public information, a law should be passed, I'm addressing to Congress, to create the People's Broadcasting Corporation, replacing PTV-4, the government-run TV station, which now aims to replicate international government broadcasting networks. Teams from these international news agencies - I'd to mention that, those interested, BBC - are set to visit the country soon to train people from the government-run channels to observe - ito ang gusto ko, total pera naman ng tao - to observe editorial independence through innovative programs and intelligent treatment and analysis of news reports, as as developments of national and international significance. The government's Bureau of Broadcast Services, better known as the Radyo ng Bayan, shall also undergo upgrading to make it financially viable and dependable for accurate, independent, and enlightening news and commentary. Radyo ng Bayan will be integrated with the PBC. As we are presently setting up a Presidential Communications Satellite Office in Davao City, PBC will also put up broadcast hubs in the Visayas and Mindanao. Davao City will also be the first site of the first Muslim channel, called as Salaam Television, and the first Lumad channel. The PCO shall coordinate with the Office of the Executive Secretary and the Presidential Legal Counsel in implementing the recently approved EO on the Freedom of Information. This Executive Order is out. As an example, on the part of our Executive Branch to make transparency and integrity as yardsticks in government performance, savings and expenses while engaging the public to a vigilant and to participate in government programs and projects. The PCO, in coordination with the Office of the Executive Secretary, is drafting the Administrative Order on the Presidential Task Force on media killings. This government does not condone violence and repression of media. The bona fide media, bona fide media, sometime they pronounce it bona feed. But that thing is, the bona fide media has always been our partner for change. Di medyo klaro yan. Hindi, anong gawin mo sa hindi bona fide media? Yan ang problema. To address backlogs and low prosecutorial effectiveness and efficiency, the investigation and case management processes shall be streamlined, including those for illegal drugs and heinous crimes. To eradicate the prevalent cultures of fear and silence that have hounded our justice system, I ask Congress, you, to enact the Whistleblower Protection Law while the present Witness Protection Program shall be strengthened. Hirap maging Presidente, maski dito lang. The number of lawyers and support staff in PAO, that is the Public Assistance Office, regional and district offices shall be increased to provide indigents more access to counsels. At this stage, I also have directed the DILG to undertake nationwide information and campaign on federalism in partnerships with various alliances and with LGUs, civil society, grassroots and faith-based organizations. Hinto muna ako dito, itong federalism. Ewan ko kung tama ako. Alam mo itong bayan natin, if I may repeat, I know that you know it. In 1521 or 1526 Magellan landed in Leyte-Kumare ko man ito, salamat mare ha. Mindanao was already Islam by 100 years. Ano ito? It's an imperialism thing. There is a historical injustice committed against the Moro people. We have to correct it, but it is, impossible now. Kaya kayong mga kapatid kong mga Moro, alam naman ninyo - ako I'm mixed, migrant ang tatay ko roon, I'm mixed blood ako, Moro pati Christian. But you know, intindihin na lang natin ito: that we cannot return to you all iyong nakuha ng mga Amerikano, Espanol, pati iyong mga Filipino mga kapitalista, those who exploited Mindanao with that thing, sloganeering, "Go to Mindanao because it is a land of promise." With the vast entry of many people, coming from the Visayas, nagkaroon tayo ng… we cannot solve it the way you want it to be. You have to understand each other, then you have to live with each other, but we will . Ang sinasabi ko lang, babalik ako, dahil ako sa federalism, both Misuari, Sema and all - at least the politico leaders ng Mindanao will agree to it. We do not, remember that ako hindi ko dinidikdik yung masyadong Abu Sayyaf because it is connected with the first talks between Misuari, the Presidents - subsequently, from President Marcos and now. Until now, until now. The only way they said that we can have this iyong BBL ibigay na natin minus the that you do not want, iyong mga constitutional issues tanggalin muna natin. Ibigay ko iyong area, nandiyan na iyan eh. I ask you, pass it minus the constitutional issues that are contentious. Ibigay na natin at when the federal system comes, isali mo na sa package together with Misuari. That is the solution for Mindanao, nothing else. Believe me, nothing else will do. Please sleep on it, ponder on it, because that is the only way to proceed. On the clamor of our citizens for timely issuance of Philippine passports, the government shall work towards amendment of the 1996 Passport Law to lengthen the validity of the passports from the current 5 years to 10 years. Tutal kayo naman ang maggagawa ng batas, you're the ones who will pass the law, even if you make it good for 30 years, ako. Bahala kayo. Basta stretch a little bit because 5 years is on a regular basis. Matagal pa naman itong passport. Mag-apply ako ng mga 10 days. Alam mo, I'd to call the attention of Secretary Yasay. If you go to Davao, look back doon sa… look at the back, likod ng itong mall, 'yung malaking mall. Sige, pangalanan na natin - SM. Doon, iyong mga tao nandyan sa pavement natutulog. For the many times nadaan ako na walang ulan, doon yan sila, because first come, first served. And the only outlet there, the outlet of your department is iyong sa SM. Iyong mga-maawa ka roon parang dito sa side ng Cotabato, lahat ng Cotabato doon sa Davao. Karamihan niyan walang mga bahay. You know, if you're an applicant in Davao City, fine. But you know kung walang mahirap kasi ano. Maka-remind yan mga Moroanon, naghihiga sa mga pavement, nasasaktan talaga ako. Masakit eh. Buong gabi maghintay sila hanggang magbukas iyang SM, kasi first come first served. Kaya sabi ko - I'm addressing to all the Cabinet members: make use of the computer. I do not want to see people lining up under the heat of the sun. I do not want to people lining up under the rain na may mga ganun. And I want itong Labor - wala na ito sa script. Iyong prompter natutulog na siguro ito, papindot-pindot diyan. Alam mo, nandiyan naman iyan. Sabi ko what I want is a journal. When the applicant presents the documents, give them a shopping list. Do not add or get anything away from it. Iyon na iyan, final. And when he complies with that, that is good. Huwag mo na siyang pabalikin. Kasi kung magtawag iyan ng 8888, my God, puntahan ko talaga kayo. 'Yan ang bisyo ko nung mayor ako. It makes no difference kung mayor-presidente. Puntahan talaga kita at hiyain kita sa maraming tao. And I would publicly ask you what the hell happened to the procedure. Pupuntahan ko talaga kayo. Local barangay, police, military, lahat, bigyan mo ng shopping list, 'wag mo lang pabalikin. Because pag magtawag ng 8888 iyan, tapos makita ko na the grievance is valid, bahala ka. Anong walang panahon. Pupuntahan kita sa opisina mo and I would ask you, "bakit?". Bigyan mo ng stub. You have to employ actuarial ability, that's easy. Pero pagtanggap mo ng tao - I'm addressing myself, under me - journal, papirmahin mo siya, lagyan mo doon, tignan mo sa computer, magkonek ka doon sa actuarial… hindi naman kailangan ng bobo diyan eh. Kasi matatapos siguro iyan mga next month, tapos na. Projections lang naman. Balik ka dito August 15, 3 o'clock. Pagdating ibigay mo. Now if he goes to Malacañang and open it up for those who have valid reasons to complain about graft and corruption, the gates of Malacañang will be open. Doon ka. Magsumbong ka, at I will be briefed by my military or aide or yung si ano - itong nagbigay ng tubig, "Sir, dito marami kang…". And the reason why I do not go out, I do not accept invitations - hindi ako tumatanggap - because every time I travel around Manila it causes a huge congestion of traffic. Kasi pati itong pag-uwi ko is… they also go by projection - paglabas ni presidente, ano yan picture taking, ganoon and they to block the… iyong roads access to the… ganoon iyan every time ang President go out, ganoon iyan. Paparahin nila iyan, sabihin nila dadaan iyan by this time, in the meantime sarado iyan, di paglabas ko kala mo Biyernes Santo, walang sasakyan diyan. Yun pala exponentially ang traffic, the tail-end of the traffic is somewhere, five kilo-and it would take about two to three hours to normalize. Kaya hindi ako tumatanggap nang-and I hate to travel. Kasi talagang lilinisin iyan eh. Ito namang ang taas kasi ng entourage Presidente silan, dulo sa dulo may ambulansiya. Hindi lang entourage, parang cortege na. Sabi ko dalawa, tatlo tama na, sa gitna lang ako. Pero ang totoo mag-taxi lang ako dito sa likod, sunud lang ako. Eh takot ba sila na… ano ba ang makuha mo kung patayin mo ako? What for? May ambulansiya roon, dagdagan mo na lang punerarya. I have also ordered the DFA to streamline documentary requirements for passport applications and open additional Consular Offices in strategic locations to decongest Metro Manila sites and avoid queues that have caused hardships and suffering to our passport applicants. I have also ordered the newly-created DICT, Information and Communication Technology, to develop a National Broadband Plan to accelerate the deployment of fiber optic cables and wireless technologies to improve internet speed. Ito para ito sa… alam ko, Mahal kong mga kababayan maligayahan kayo nito. Pagpaano mo lang yung Tagalog ko, kasi… eh kayo hindi kayo marunong mag-Bisaya, eh di. Wi-Fi access shall be provided at no charge in selected public places including plazas and parks, public libraries, schools, government hospitals, train stations, airports and seaports. Di ba. Happy lahat. All government agencies are instructed to enable their clients to submit applications for coordination, other agencies combined. Taas mo, wala na iyan, ayaw mo magsalita. And national portal, yes because it's our… parang website. Ito: We shall intensify… mainit talaga ako dito. I place it in parity to drugs. We shall intensify our war against human traffickers and illegal recruiters that prey on our migrants. To help ensure that the hard-earned money of our Overseas Filipinos are put into productive use, a mandatory financial education for all migrant and their communities shall be pursued along with incentives to encourage entrepreneurship among them. I may now also ask on Congress to consider drawing up bills consolidating and merging agencies and offices all having to do with Overseas Filipinos to have a department that shall focus on and quickly respond to their problems and concerns. Kailangan mo ng isa. Ngayon I have asked… I don't know, Secretary Bello is here? Bebot. Wala? Absinero talaga iyan. Maski sa Cabinet absinero iyan. Gusto ko he will rent or will lease some buildings to be near sa… for overseas only. At lagyan ko na-I will direct all… BIR, lahat na. Lahat ng something to do with the clearances of the police, in one building, may booth lang. I said, "my God make use of the computer." doon lang siya mag-ikot sa isang building. Ang Filipino hindi na siya magpunta doon sa Statistics, hindi na magpunta doon sa ano, diyan, diyan sa office na iyan. Gamitin ninyo ang computer and you can get the results after. Why do he has to travel to Malate, then has to cope with the traffic, he can only accomplish one document at one time. NBI clearances is doon na ninyo ibigay. Lahat na doon na. At kung dapat… may awa itong si Bello, pakainin ninyo iyong mga tao doon, lalo na sa probinsya. 'Pag tingin ninyo taga-probinsya, finish it away. Make use of the computer. Kapag hindi ninyo ginamit iyan, tapon na lang ninyo. Throw away your computers and I understand that. Make use, do the computers. To help avoid squatter-conditions in relocation sites, we urge utilities Meralco and electric cooperatives to exercise their corporate social responsibility by making direct connections to relocation sites and depressed areas. Alam mo kung bakit? Hindi na nila nilagyan diyan eh. That's why I had to talk to you ganito. Bakit? It's because walang kuryente pagka mahirap ka. You don't own the land, the City Engineer will not-that is my experience 23 years as mayor. Hindi yan magbigay ng direct connection, kasi hindi ikaw may-ari ng lupa. But that squatter there has been there for 20 years. Mag-connect, connect sila. Pagka-connect- connect nila, ang gamitin nila iyong wire na… iyong pinakamura. , it overheats because connect-connect na lang sila kung sinong… minsan magnakaw. You know, we'll have to make the adjustments. It is not for these people to make the corrections, because they are not in a position to do it. You have to adjust to the needs of our people. Tutal iyan namang… iyang namang squatter na iyan, as long as I sit here as President, there will be no demolitions without relocations. Hindi talaga ako papayag. Hindi naman aso iyan na in Davao. I'd to make a dialogue with the businessmen, "Sir, how are you investing in this land, you have bought with the squatter?" I bought it at about 60 million? Dagdagan mo ng 20 million, ako na ang bahala. Sabihin ko doon sa mga tao, "bili tayo ng relocation site or I will provide." Government will expropriate. I will make use of the expropriation powers. Gawa ko ganoon sa Davao eh. I have 20 hectares there. I will expropriate some land there, iyong malapit lang. Then sabihin ko, "this 20 million will help your journey to a new land." And I will urge everybody, iyong mga bagong mga factories doon sila magtayo. Magtiis-tiis lang muna kayo. In the meantime, to mitigate the hardships of these people - that's the only way to do it. Pero instead of demolition, walang matirahan ang tao. Tutal you sat on your rights for many years, eh bakit ngayon pipilitin mo akong magkaproblema ng ganoon. May iba kasi hinahayaan nila for ten, twenty years they do nothing. And when the time comes na… ipagbili lang nila, eh tayo ngayon ang distorbohin. Oh 'di gumastos ka para mas madali, add a little bit more and there will be at least peace. 'Pag hindi, wala iyan… fight na naman iyan between government and the… tawag nila squatters. Squatters naman talaga iyan. Masasaktan lang, mamatay for no reason at all. Eh kung mayaman ka, bigyan mo naman ng konting ano, provide a relocation and I will be glad to talk to the people and say, "go, it is not yours.". I have directed the concerned regulatory agencies to prioritize the issuance of required permits for power development - iyan sa akin. Ang problema… sandali lang 'to. Para ka diyan. Iyong mga environmentalist, mayroon tayong ano kasi… marami iyong coal, pati iyong-ito nga, itong energy emissions, wala naman akong problema diyan. But do not tell me na if you - ambassador ka tapos sabihin mo sa akin na medyo hanggang diyan kayo, kasi kami hanggang din dito lang kami. Ano? Kayo umabot diyan. You are now in the apex of your industrial , but along the way you were the first - America, China, Europe. Kayo bongang-bonga, until now it contribute only something point zero. If you put restrictions doon sa treaty na iyan, the treaty which we are trying to… it's still here in the Senate. Let us be clear on this. We need to industrialize. We need the power, and therefore the emissions would also be considered. I can't say it. I established five economic zones here and you to say that - you have spoken , carbon footprints, mahirap iyan. I mean, it's hard. I cannot agree on anything that will delay - I'm only good for six years. I intend to be something during my term. Now, I'm sure that the heavy machineries would come in and even the power. Cheapest is coal. Ito naman locally, you get into trouble with the Gina. , we'll talk sa Cabinet na lang. Si Gina naman is a fine lady. Huwag ka lang magsimangot sa harapan niya. Bigyan ka niya permit maski lima. Magsimangot ka, zero. All that she is today is be gracious to her, that's all. It's a matter of talking and explaining with her. But if it is the - you are using the state-of-the-art technology, and I've seen it several times in the other power plants in this country, if it is a good one, then we will consider. I said because we need the energy to power our industrialization. To strengthen the delivery of social services, the government will intensify its social protection programs it can use its resources and expertise to make a dent in the country's poverty levels. What we want is genuinely to reduce vulnerabilities of our people, build resiliency and empower individuals, families and communities. The beneficiaries of 4Ps shall be made to become independent and self-reliant after they have graduated from the program. We aim to present them with other forms of assistance that they can stand on their own two feet. But now, I have decided to direct the DSWD to provide the rice subsidies to the poorest of the families - at least para makakain lang every month. Iyong sako na ano… We are planning to increase spending for basic education and incorporate mandatory education about the evils of drugs. We will also intensify and expand the Alternative Learning System programs. The government will also provide universal health insurance for all Filipinos benefits… Sali na lang natin sa PhilHealth. The professional competence and operational capabilities of government hospitals and health facilities will be strengthened. Consistent with our international obligations and in keeping with national mandates, this administration vows to protect women's rights and human rights abuses against our women because it is unacceptable… mambugbog ka ng babae. Thus, I order all agencies, oversight bodies and local government units down to the barangay level to implement the Magna Carta of Women. By doing , we will ensure that man and woman will be partners in the pursuit of the country's economic, social, cultural and political development. To our Lumad brothers - and they are here, outside… outside I'm sure. I told the security to let them come in if they want. Sa kanila man 'to. To our brothers I have this to say: The government has issued to you Certificates of Ancestral Domain Title covering vast tracts of land in the Island of Mindanao. You have the Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act and the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples to protect and assist you. The government has given you the legal tool to improve yourselves financially, economically and socially. Make use of your ancestral domain. Do not let it remain idle. While the government is always ready to help you, you must first help yourself. We cannot legislate financial and economic progress for you. It is you and you alone who can do that. You can chart your fate, but do it within constitutional and legal means. After being devastated by natural and man-made calamities these past few years, we are still to recover emotionally from the loss of our loved ones, and materially from the loss of our homes and income sources. There are many among us whose emotional wounds are still fresh and painful to the touch. We cannot erase the images of death and destruction from our minds. We cannot wash away the stench of rotting flesh from our noses. And there are many of us who are still waiting for the help that was promised. The enormity of the problem of drug addiction has been made manifest by the number of surrenderees which grows by the hundreds each day that passes. Since July 1, we have already made 3,600 drug-related. Arrests. 120 (120,000) drug dependents have already surrendered and 70,000 (7,000) of them are pushers. You think this is a… it would take the entire resources of this government to fight this war. I have nothing but the interest of my country. But in its wake - because the PDEA say is that-it's about- that was a statement made by the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency. Two years ago, PDEA came out with a statement that there are 3 million drug addicts in this country. That was two or three years ago. How do you think would the number, incrementally, if we count now. Give it a liberal addition, … lagyan mo ng seven thousand. , 3 million 7 hundred thousand. The number is staggering and scary. The drug lords that you desperately want to strangle are not here. Walang mga bilyonaryo dito. The ones that you catch, running after are the lieutenants. They do it by technology. They're cooking it in the international waters. Tinatapon nila iyan bulto, by the drums, dikitan nila ng GPS. , makikita agad. We are hard put sa intelligence, because they've invented this direct satellite. Hindi na magdadaan iyan ng… all they have to do is to triangulate where the… pag-ikot niyan. And there's many… and they're in coves. If we do not help from our friends here in Asia and America and Europe, the sheer number and problem, believe me, will drown us as a republic. Kayo, tignan ninyo ito. How I can I solve the problem now by arresting? Hinahanap ko… matagal na akong Presidente. Gusto kong patayin, ang problema pupunta pa ako doon, then I'll ask the permission from this country that I will be on because I have to slaughter these idiots for destroying my country. Ganoon iyon eh. Hindi lang kasi naintin-ayaw pa naman bitawan, kasi ayaw naman kasi ng military, pati police. But you know, I said, I'll be talking in front of the Republic through its representatives, for the people. I have to tell you how do we solve this problem? Tell me. Ako naman lang eh. Make it public, fine. Make it confidential, if you go to mayor, go to you, to your house, . But that is the enormity of the problem. It's enormous that you are intimidated even to make a move. Because you know you cannot stop it . Mabunggo mo isa dito, hinulog sa dagat eh marami namang nagluluto doon. It's a free for all enterprise for the criminals at this time. Kung ako, if I had the plane and time I could ang sinasabi ko-sabi ko roon sa military, 'pag nakita ninyo, eh di pasabugin mo. Maski nag-surrender iyan, may white flag, pang-gyera lang iyan hindi iyan pang-kriminal, pasabugin mo. Show no mercy to them, because they are not doing any mercy to us . Bakit ako mag… iyan ang problema. But we should not despair. Someone wrote, it is when the night is darkest that dawn breaks. We are imbued with resiliency that has been tested and proven more difficult times as in the past. We have to bond and act together. We have to help each other. For then and only then can we prevail. And the Filipino, disciplined, informed and involved, shall rise from the rubbles of sorrow and pain that all the mirrors in the world will reflect the face of a passion that have change this land. DAGHANG SALAMAT! Senate President Vicente Sotto III and the honorable members of the Senate; House Speaker Alan Peter Cayetano and the honorable members of the House of Representatives; Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo; former Presidents Joseph Ejercito Estrada and Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo; Chief Justice Diosdado Peralta and the justices of the Supreme Court; His Excellency Munther Mafoodh Salim Al-Mantheri and the esteemed members of the diplomatic corps; Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea and the members of the Cabinet; mga mahal kong kababayan. We live in a troubled time. Our dream of prosperity for our country was suddenly snuffed by a pandemic virulent virus. No nation was spared. Neither rich nor poor were exempt from the onslaught of this deadly disease. But let us not despair. The vaccine is around the corner. Sooner and not later, the virus that gobbled up thousands of lives will itself be laid to rest. In the meantime, let us express the nation's gratitude to those who courageously and willingly put their lives on the line to serve the people and country. We share the griefs of their families and no amount of tears can compensate their great losses. My countrymen, it is sad that while government focuses its attention and resources to battle the coronavirus, there are those who take advantage of a pre-occupied government. One of them is Senator Frank Drilon. In an interview, he arrogantly mentioned among others that oligarchs need not be rich. Then he linked the anti-dynasty system with oligarchy and the topic was my daughter and son. This happened after the Committee on Franchise voted 70-11 to deny the. Grant of franchise to ABS-CBN. , he was defending the Lopezes that they are not oligarchs. Great wealth enables economic elites and corporations to influence public policy to their advantage. Media is a powerful tool in the hands of oligarchs the Lopezes who used their media outlets in their battles with political figures. I am a casualty of the Lopezes during the 2016 election. The dealers and purveyors of illegal drugs, hiding in the shadow of COVID- 19, have stepped up their activities. The amount of shabu valued at millions of pesos seized during police operations speak volumes of the enormity and weight of the problem that we bear. The corrupt, the grafters and the influence peddlers also take advantage of the fear and confusion that the coronavirus generates. The financial and material assistance of the government to the unemployed, the sick and the destitute running into billions of pesos, are not spared from corruption and ineptitude. Even the donations from -meaning private persons are skimmed before reaching their intended beneficiaries. It is snatching food from the mouths of babes. The profiteers, over-pricers and corrupt felons must be laughing while they stash their dirty monies. But not for long. They cannot outrun the long arm of the law. In this regard, the words of former President Ramon Magsaysay ring fresh and relevant today as on the day they were said decades ago. He said:. -We need men of integrity and faith Rizal and del Pilar, men of action Bonifacio, men of inflexible patriotism Mabini. We need their zeal, their self-reliance, their capacity for work, their devotion to service, their ability to lose themselves in the common cause of building a nation.? If we allow greed, self-interest and ambition to rule us, then as stated by one prominent physician, we will -be left with nothing better than the lesser evil instead of the greater good.? In my inaugural address four years ago, I said that no leader can succeed at anything of national importance significance unless he has the cooperation and support of the people he is tasked to lead and sworn to serve. The efforts and resources which we poured out produced the momentum needed to bring our country closer to our goals. Suffice it to state, we made significant strides over time. Over 4.3 million poor families benefitted from the Pantawid Pamilya; over. 9.2 million beneficiaries received subsidies under the Unconditional Cash Transfer program; we also made available tertiary education and universal health care. Public utility drivers were given assistance through the Pantawid Pasada Program. There are complaints that some drivers did not receive any assistance at all. I have directed the DSWD and DILG to look into this. I welcome the passage of the law postponing the Barangay and Sangguniang Kabataan Elections. The postponement saved -needed government funds and ensured implementation of projects under the current barangay officials. In hindsight, it also saved us from holding the polls while we dealt and continue to deal with the pandemic. The Malasakit Centers Act has proven to be of great help to our less fortunate citizens needing medical services through a one-stop platform in government hospitals. We commend the initiative and work of Senator Bong Go in this regard as as other significant pieces of legislation. As of today, there are 75 Malasakit Centers serving Filipinos all over the country. These centers will be of great help in ensuring that our people remain healthy and resilient during these challenging times. The Salary Standardization Law of 2019 increases the salary of civilian government workers. I hope that this law will inspire our government workers to perform better and encourage young, brilliant citizens to join public service. I appreciate the law establishing the National Academy of Sports. We can now give our deserving student-athletes the training and support they need to excel in their chosen field of endeavors. With the commitment of key members of Congress and the Executive Department, the PHISGOC, Philippine Sports Commission, and the Philippine Olympic Committee were bound together with one vision to host the. 30th Southeast Asian Games. Our athletes prevailed. More than that, we fostered pride, patriotism, genuine sportsmanship, and camaraderie in our South East Asian brothers and sisters. Indeed, we won as one. To our business community and the general public, we assure you that the landmark Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act has been gaining momentum. We are closer to eliminating overregulation in government services. Frontline processes, including consular services, processing of building and business permits, and services for overseas Filipinos and seafarers were. Streamlined. Passports and drivers' license validity were lengthened to ease the burden of the public. We received a BBB plus credit rating despite a sea of credit rating downgrades and negative outlook revisions worldwide. The Japan Credit Rating Agency upgraded us from BBB plus to A minus last month. Meanwhile, Moody's has affirmed and maintained the country's ratings at B2. — Baa2 . Our fiscal position is strong, our economic and fiscal management prudent and our banking system robust. We are in a better position to weather the crisis caused by the COVID-19 global pandemic. We have accomplished significant infrastructure projects under the Build Build Build Program. I will not dwell lengthily on the nitty-gritty of our infrastructure accomplishments now lest I bore you. Instead we will release a comprehensive written report on our collective milestones and the details of accomplishments to remind us that perseverance, patience and determination will help us move forward even in the difficult of times. We issued last year Executive Order No. 100 establishing the Diversity and Inclusion Program as a national program of the Government. We want to end the discrimination of persons on the basis of age, disability, ethnicity, sexual orientation and gender identity and expression, and other character traits. My administration always believed that freedom from illegal drugs, terrorism, corruption and criminality, is itself a . Part of our efforts to uphold human rights is protection of the rights of children and the against discrimination. Early last year, I signed Executive Order No. 92 creating the National Council Against Child Labor. Government efforts to protect the rights of children will be amplified to prevent, reduce and eliminate any form of child labor. Our achievements along these lines have been extolled by an overwhelming number of our fellow member-States in the UN Human Rights Council, during its recently held 44th session last June. Rest assured that we will not dodge our obligation to fight for human rights. My countrymen, there are lessons to be learned from the coronavirus pandemic. It jolted us to realize that gains made after spending planning, effort, cost and time could diminish considerably and quickly for reasons beyond one's anticipation; that it is easier to destroy than to build; that in a crisis of national proportions that affects every aspect of human life, governments need to have the support and cooperation of the people if it is to succeed in battling the cause of that crisis, that there are people who ask for compassion but show none themselves; that life, after all, is fickle the weather. The gains we achieved in the first three and a half years were put to a test when the pandemic suddenly struck the global community. While I am aware that the road towards a comfortable life for all would be far easy if pandemic had not occurred and along the rest of the world we suffered. The global scale and socio-economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has been unprecedented. Yet in the throes of this global health emergency, we have been able to withstand the headwinds generated by this coronavirus. In this regard I would to express my gratitude to all those who made possible the steady supply of food, water, and basic utilities our households and the provision of basic social services and financial assistance to our people. Our profound gratitude goes to everyone who helped keep our country's food supply chain running, the valiant soldiers, policemen and security guards who kept peace and order in our communities; the dedicated personnel who kept our essential establishments operational. You showed us kindness and selflessness. You gave us strength. You risked your own lives to serve the greater good in keeping with the Filipino spirit of Bayanihan. I also thank the men and women of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Emerging Infectious Diseases and the National Task Force against COVID-19 for all the countless hours it spent to keep the pandemic in check and for all the efforts it made to ensure the safety of our people. Let me also recognize the efforts of the local government units that stepped up and initiated their own response measures to contain the effects of COVID-19 and its impact to their constituents. Have been — impact to its constituents. I know the difficulties you are undergoing. I pray that the officials of each LGU in our country - from the barangay to the autonomous regions - would set aside partisan politics and selfish interests to do what is and good for all. I likewise issued Executive Order No. 104, which imposed ceilings on the retail prices of at least 133 drugs and medicines, and directed a continuous review of the retail prices of others. This proved to be providential now that we are facing a pandemic. To everyone who helped us in this time of great need, maraming salamat po. Let me say that the strength of a nation rests in the hands of the people acting as one with government, in the pursuit of common goals and objectives. When the pandemic struck, I decided to prioritize life over other considerations. According to experts, the interventions that the government had put in place prevented as as 1.3 to 3.5 million infections. To me, even if the numbers were lower, it would still be and would have been worth the sacrifice we made. -Buhay muna, bago ang lahat.". We initially encountered difficulties ramping up our testing capacity. We now have 93 accredited testing laboratories nationwide and we are aiming to conduct 1.4 million tests by end of July and ensure a quick turnaround time of 48 to 72 hours. Under the Social Amelioration Program, we allotted for poor and low-income households who were affected during this pandemic — who thrive on a -no-work, no-pay? Arrangement. Admittedly, our implementation of the Social Amelioration Program was not perfect. And some opportunists turned crisis into opportunity. We will catch up with you sooner than you think. We came up with the COVID-19 Adjustment Measures Program. We extended financial assistance to over 650,000 affected individuals in the formal sector, 110,000 OFWs abroad, and almost 83,000 repatriated OFWs. We also provided temporary wage employment to. Displaced marginalized workers through the TUPAD Project. Our indigent senior citizens were also provided with a stipend for the semester of the current year. This health emergency stretched the government's resources to its limits. In response, the Office of the President worked closely with Congress for the quick passage of the Bayanihan to Heal as One Act. May I again reiterate my thanks to you, the men and women of Congress, for the effort you invested into passing that law. I hope that we can get some or the same treatment of clarity, purpose and the. Fastness to support the passage of the Bayanihan , which will supplement funds for recovery and response against the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We must facilitate the country's economic recovery. I call on Congress to fast-track the passage of proposed measures such as the Corporate Recovery and Tax Incentives for Enterprises or CREATE Act. This immediately cuts the corporate income levy from the current 30 to 25 percent and give the government flexibility to grant a combination of fiscal and non-fiscal incentives, among others. The Financial Institutions Strategic Transfer or FIST Act will set up mechanisms allowing banks and other financial institutions to dispose of and transfer non-performing assets and loans to asset management companies similar to Special Purpose Vehicles. Our economic managers have seen infrastructure investment as an effective tool to help spur high growth, attract investments, create jobs, and achieve financial inclusion for all Filipinos. The has resumed the construction of the North Luzon Expressway Harbor Link, the NLEX-SLEX Connector, the Cavite-Laguna Expressway, the Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3, the R-1 Bridge Project, the Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway Project, and the Subic Freeport Expressway Project, to name a few. To realize the maximum benefit from the country's investments, the infrastructure projects under the Build, Build, Build Program, which are labor and capital intensive, are not mere springboards for the country's swift recovery -pandemic. They are economic benefits — economic benefits to be distributed to all corners of the country and push sustainability in urban centers, Manila. The TESDA launched an online mode of livelihood and skills training. There are 71 free online training to help upskill trainees for the opportunities. I ask the TESDA to come up with special training programs to retool our OFWs they can find employment opportunities here at home. I am also calling on the CHED for scholarship programs for the qualified dependents of our OFWs. I direct the Department of Agriculture and DTI to come up with agri-business and entrepreneurship projects to help displaced OFWs rebuild their livelihood. Further, I ask the LANDBANK and other government financial institutions to continue providing low-interest loans to our. OFWs. Sa mga kababayan ko na naghihirap sa ibang bansa, nandito ang inyong gobyerno para matulungan kayo at inyong mga pamilya, lalo na sa panahong ito. The government will intensify its efforts to help businesses, our micro, small and medium enterprises or MSMEs, by providing responsive government assistance and services, capitalization, and business operations support as we adapt to the next normal. Nananawagan po ako sa ating mga lessors - nananawagan po ako sa ating mga lessors: malasakit at Bayanihan po sana ang pairalin natin ngayon. This is not the time to drive away lessees. During normal times they were the primary source of your income stream. Now, it's time to be fair and compassionate. Come up with amenable arrangement with your. Tenants. Huwag po natin silang ipagtabuyan, tanggalan ng tubig, kuryente, at bubong. Commercial establishments are requested to give grace periods allow deferment of payments, for MSMEs that were forced to close down during the quarantine period. Let us help them. Recover. We pump-primed the recovery and rehabilitation of MSMEs. The DTI, through the Small Business Corporation, set up the PhP1-billion COVID-19 Assistance to Restart Enterprises or CARES Program to provide zero-interest loans for MSMEs affected by the pandemic. As of July 10, 2020, over 2,600 loan applications worth have been approved. We are optimistic that this initiative will help our MSMEs stabilize and recover from their losses. I also enjoin the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and banks operating in the country to provide regulatory relief for our MSMEs and allow loan payment extensions, without incurring penalties and charges. We need your help to prevent the collapse of companies saddled with accumulated amortizations and payables caused by the closure of their businesses at the height of the strict quarantine periods. As we embark on these efforts towards inclusive recovery, we should acknowledge that all forms of government support will go to naught if the. New MSMEs do not thrive because of lack of consumer support. Ito ang panahon para suportahan natin ang ating mga kababayan na nagnenegosyo at gumagawa ng mga produktong sariling atin. In the same manner, the tourism and recreation industries, which are among the hardest hit by the pandemic, count on our full support. While we slowly to put the fun back in our local travels, the national government agencies and LGUs must harmonize their policies to boost tourism ensuring everyone's -being. We enjoin our people to help boost the economy by traveling locally once the necessary systems are in place. The DoST offers its Enterprise Technology Upgrading Program to enable businesses to access training that will help them transition to online and contactless operations. Now more than ever, we need to protect our consumers. I direct the Department of Trade and Industry to ensure the empowerment of Filipinos on their consumer rights, and coordinate strategies between public and private organizations in building a fair, safe, resilient, and sustainable economy. There are welcome developments for the e-Commerce industry. But major economic activities take place in a borderless environment with meager regulatory controls. They expose consumers to various risks related to security, data privacy, and misrepresentation. We must patrol the country's cyberspace and enforce online consumer and data protection and privacy laws. We must run after online scammers and those undermining the people's trust in online transactions. We must continue to protect Filipinos in the new normal and remind the world that we are responsible stewards of data. I am committed to protect both the physical and digital lives of our law-abiding countrymen. The national government shall lead the way in our transition to online systems. I reiterate my call for all government instrumentalities to implement systems that shall make physical queuing a thing of the past. Panahon na para mawala na ang pila para mapagsilbihan ang gobyerno nang walang kahirapan para sa tao. The DILG, DBM, and the ARTA, along with all agencies and instrumentalities of government, are hereby directed to make possible services available online. We need to. Adjust to and adopt a paper-less type business and work performance. We need e-governance our people with the services they need the comfort of their homes or workplaces. It will enable our bureaucracy to better transition into in the 'new normal' and cut or minimize red tape. Until the COVID-19 vaccine is available, I will not allow the traditional face- to-face teaching or learning unless risks of exposure to sickness are eliminated. I cannot and will not put to risk the health and lives of our students and teachers. Iyong…. About two weeks ago, I — I seemed to have said that I would allow the face-to-face classes to resume. But we were talking of January because my thinking is that by September, we would have the vaccine. How to get it from the producers or from other governments is something which we have to deal with because everyone — the… It's a global need and everyone will go for it. But let me mention it in passing that about four days ago, I made a plea to President Xi Jinping that if they have the vaccine, can they allow us to be one of the first or if it is needed, if we have to buy it, that we will be granted credit that we can normalize as fast as possible. Life that is lost is lost forever. Courses that are not substantial can be supplemented. Education that is delayed can be recovered. We must implement online learning, modular learning, and TV- and radio- based broadcast, which students coming from different backgrounds can avail. DepEd will provide printed modules for those who cannot afford online learning. In support of the Learning Continuity Program through blended learning, we plan to increase the number of schools with ICT equipment in the coming months. The DepEd and the DICT are building up the Public Education Network or PEN that will connect all public schools and DepEd offices nationwide. We will prioritize the connection of all Last Mile Schools and those with no electricity supply can have it via satellite and energized via solar panels. By 2022,. Before I step down, the PEN shall be realized. I'm referring to the program. I will — I will do it. TV frequencies reverted back to the government for cause or reason exclusively to the exclusion of persons or dummies, to cope with the demand of the next normal. These will be used to provide uninterrupted quality education to our children in our shift to e-learning. I am directing Secretary Guevarra, Secretary Dela Peña and Secretary Honasan, in collaboration with Secretary Briones, and Secretary Avisado, together with Secretary Dominguez, to come up with an integrated program and implementation mechanism to ensure that these TV frequencies are utilized by government through the facilities of PTV4 for the utmost benefit of the Filipino people. Let me — allow me to segue a little bit. For the remaining two years of my term, all that is good that belongs to government, whether it be the airwaves, whether it be the lines, or that is good for the people, will belong to the government and it should be government who should be given the first option to utilize them. Ang sobra, kanila. I call on our companies to improve their services lest we be forced to take drastic steps to address the less-than-ideal service that the public is getting from you. Alam mo sisingit na lang ako dito. I am… Sometimes we are a government pictured to be weak and incompetent because we cannot force our mandate. Alam mo itong nagbibigay ng mga public services, you better improve. Huwag naman ninyo kaming pahintayin sampung taon bago kami makakamit ng mga services that the other countries are enjoying. If it's a question of added capitalization or the infusion of money, go and look for it. Maghanap kayo because if you are not ready to improve — anak — I as close all of you and we revert back to the line telephone at kukunin ko 'yan, i-expropriate ko sa gobyerno. Alam mo itong… I'll be straight, iyong Smart pati itong Globe, ilang taon na ito, at ang sagot palagi sa akin, "the party cannot be reached." Eh nasaan pala pumunta 'yung y*** na 'yon? Eh kung ganoon lang naman ibigay ninyo sa amin, we are a republic, a sovereign country, bear that in mind because the patience of the Filipino. People is reaching its limit, at I will be the one to articulate the anger of the Filipino people. And you not want what I intend to do with you. Kindly improve the services before December. I want to call Jesus Christ to Bethlehem. Better have that line cleared. Alam mo sa totoo lang, at the end — naa-ano na ako sa inyo. I have been a citizen of this country and parang nilalaro lang ninyo ang… Kayong may pera, p***. May pera kayo? Negosyo kayo. Wala kayong pera? P***, umalis kayo dito. You know, you give us half deals, half-cooked transactions, lousy service. Tapos ang tao nagbabayad. Tell us now if you cannot improve on it because I will work by December. I have two years. The next two years will be spent improving the telecommunications of this country without you. I will find a way. I will talk to Congress and find a way how to do it. Last year, I said that distributing economic and business activities is imperative to our country's sustained and equitable growth. Today I reiterate that statement. I issued Administrative Order No. 18, directing concerned agencies to strengthen the development of Special Economic Zones in areas outside Metro Manila. I also issued Executive Order No. 114 to institutionalize the Balik Probinsya, Bagong Pag-Asa Program. This consolidates and refocuses existing economic and social welfare programs, activities and projects toward the countryside. It also an council, headed by Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea, which will create a framework for the effective implementation of the project. In 2021, we aim to increase access to healthcare services by continuously hiring and deploying more than 20,000 health professionals. This will augment health workforce in the LGUs, in isolated and disadvantaged areas. We will implement projects to establish and improve Barangay Health Stations, Rural Health Units, and other healthcare facilities. We need to address internal security. We are pursuing a whole- of-nation approach to bring peace and order and development in the countryside. We need to provide interventions and implement the Barangay. Development Program. This would provide cleared and threatened. Communities and… This refers to a program where the Armed Forces would play a vital role in the one-nation approach. This is what — mean by this. And that everyone, every agency of the government including the Armed Forces of the Philippines should participate. And I am aware of the. Skirmishes and the assassination of our soldiers and I said, -Correct this that we can proceed with the barangay implementation as fast as possible.? We have made significant strides in the past four years, but we need the support of local government leaders. We need your help to implement the Barangay Development Program. Certain sectors expressed concerns when I declared martial law in Mindanao and its extension three times. But 2019 ended without my office requesting any further extension. Martial law in Mindanao ended without abuses by the civilian sector, by the police, by the military. It ended because this time I know that they know how to love the country. I thank Congress for its support to this administration's programs. Congress has been productive. But more remains to be done. You know my speech if you followed it carefully, it's all a plea to Congress to do this, to do that, to make a law or craft a . And this one, I urge Congress to pass a law establishing the Department of Overseas Filipinos solely on addressing the concerns of Filipinos abroad and their families. I reiterate the swift passage — before that — before this… Kawawa kasi itong ating mga overseas. If it's only an office there in the Labor department they are overworked or for reason, their needs, their pleas are not attended to with dispatch and with care. OFW pati itong ano ngayon ito yung sinabi ko kanina, they — I… I will go for it. We will need it to help them. I reiterate the swift passage of a law reviving the death. Penalty by lethal injection for crimes specified under the Comprehensive Dangerous Act of 2002. I did not hear clapping I presume that they are not interested. Wala kang… Someday I'll tell you the story what happened to the Philippines. Hindi ngayon. But when I'm — sasabihin ko sa inyo ang totoo bakit. Nagkaganito 'yung droga ng Pilipinas. Why the drug syndicates continue to operate the countries of Colombia, Mexico, and it is being played inside the national penitentiaries. Para tayong — talagang binababoy tayo. Sabihin ko sa inyo. But this is not a time for storytelling. SONA kasi ito dito na lang. This law will not only help us deter criminality but also save our children from the dangers posed by illegal and dangerous drugs. May I be allowed with the indulgence of the body, itong bakit talaga ako galit sa droga. Let us make this a semi-formal speech. Alam mo kasi limang pamilya members o anim or pito, pagka bumagsak yung tatay to drugs, the family crumbles. There's no more home to them. Droga, and if he's receiving a salary naglala — nagtatrabaho sa pantalan, 300 a day, tapos ang shabu is sold at two. He has about 100 to bring home. Kaya pagka ganun nagaaway- away na, ang mga bata hindi nakakapag-aral, yung iba ligaw na mga babae into early prostitution kung ano-ano nangyari. Hindi lang alam nitong mga —. - na this is happening all over the country everyday. And what is tragic is this, when the family starts to crumble, there's no home, and invariably the wife would look for another… Now the husband will look for a job doon sa abroad. At yung asawa aalis, yung bana — lalaki nasa droga, yung mga anak iniiwan sa kapitbahay, sa kapatid. And the ferocity of the laws of the Filipino family home has been destroyed. Kaya kung anong mangyari nito the wife works in the Middle East. I am not zeroing on any particular country mind you. But alam naman natin there are tribes in the Middle East which would allow rape as part of the territory of being a househelp. Kasama yan, kasama talaga yan. Iyan ang mahirap diyan. You have a wife there being crucified, being used. Magpadala ng pera tapos ang mga anak nasa shabu na rin kasi these are the guys that the shabu people would you know they stick by them until it crumbles, the resistance. And then you have plenty of this all over the country. Hindi lang nila alam yung sinasabi nila na misery sa itong human rights, plus 10 yan. Not to count the victims of crimes perpetrated by people addicted to shabu. That is the reason why I'm vicious in my — galit talaga ako kasi nilalaruan tayo. , I don't know any other president — pero ako ayaw ko yon. Ayaw kong lalaruan ang Pilipino. Do not do it in my country because I will kill you. That is a commitment. Owning safe, decent and affordable housing is every Filipino's dream. But the housing market remains inaccessible to of our countrymen. I renew my call for Congress to pass the National Housing Development bill and the Rental Housing Subsidy bill. These will enable all Filipinos- regardless of social status-to live in decent homes where their families can lead meaningful lives. I also call on Congress to amend Republic Act No. 10912 the Continuing Professional Development Act of 2016. In this time of great pandemic and forthcoming reconstruction, requiring our professionals to undergo seminars is burdensome and not realistic. This must end. Ito pang isa, there are — may mga profession… Isingit ko na lang lahat tutal this is to inform the nation. May mga profession na they would require. — I think it's the nurses — they would require them to come to Manila to retrain and — for another round of expenses. Itong mga seminar-seminar na ito dapat mahinto. I don't know in other provinces but during my time yang — barangay expeditions ng mga opisyal, hininto ko rin yan. Which reminds me, I will act on this also in due time. We hail our health professionals as heroes. Now is the time to pass the Advanced Nursing — iyan ho — Nursing Education Act and the law instituting the Medical Reserve Corps. COVID-19 will not only be the last pandemic. We need to create a National Disease Prevention and Management Authority to better respond to future outbreaks. We count on Congress' full support. You can let it remain for a while in the Department of Health kung wala pang pera but you have to expand the services or it will also entail a little bit of money but not as as expensive when you set up a department. In the long term, we are looking into the creation of the National Disease Prevention and Management Authority to better prepare for pandemics, protect lives, and allow development to proceed even in the worst of times. We are counting on the full support of Congress for this critically important endeavor. I don't know but I'll leave it to Congress to … It's another department. There seems that it could be a multilayer redundant thing between the health and the proposed department. I call on Congress to prioritize the passage of a law for the Unified System of Separation, Retirement and Pension of the Military and Uniformed Personnel without however diminishing the benefits that our uniformed personnel are. Entitled to under existing laws. There is a need to adjust the pension system which will be applicable only to newly-hired uniformed personnel as not to cause a -ballooning effect? Against the budget of the military in the years to come and yet maintain the pension benefits of those already in service under the present law. This issue needs a solution. Now. Umpisahan natin ngayon para hindi na maging problema sa susunod na mga taon. I want to… You know one of the… This is not politicking, I am not running. I cannot run anymore. Iyong dinoble ko yung suweldo ng pulis pati army it was a clarion call para for them also to have a decent life and they are able to get the which ordinarily cannot be reached by any government employee. Ang akin doon is yung corruption that it be a vain attempt but dagdagan ang suweldo para it would be a hedge against corruption. We must also modernize the Bureau of Fire Protection and the Bureau of Immigration with urgency. Alam mo sa Davao and if you go there I can show you, one of the. Serviceable trucks, fire trucks that we have in the City of Davao… Of course ang city mayroon ng sarili aside from the Bureau of Fire — Bureau of Fire which is national, mayroon 'yung Bureau of Fire. Would you believe it? Serviceable still. Ang pangalan ng truck, Studebaker. Ang katawan — ang talagang matatag ang katawan. Kaya ang makina, Isuzu. Pero pa rin. It can put out fire. Totoo. This is how this Bureau of Fire issue na medyo na — na-overlook natin nang matagal. I emphasize the creation of the Department of Disaster Resilience. Our people's safety cannot be delegated to a council or commission. Equally important is the establishment of evacuation centers in every city, province and municipality throughout the country. We must act before another major disaster shakes into action. The problem is disaster and even a fire cannot be — make — they cannot make a study for projection when the earthquake would suddenly come and make a big crack there. Hindi natin alam talaga. Ang ibig kong sabihin, this will require more than one brainwork kung paano talaga itong how to prevent or avoid disaster. It will be… By the way, before starting, I was tempted to say it pero baka magtindigan kayo. It will be all for me if Bong Go will stay. Wala akong problema. Kasi sabi ko na this piece of speech of mine would be one of the longest SONAs. That I will deliver. Nakita ko 'yung page pagbigay sa akin. Iyong ibang input, akin. But 'yung iba lahat. Ang nangyari po, binalik ko sa kanila. -Make it. Short.? Pagbalik sa akin, mas makapal na. "Naku, p***** i**." Eh di nandiyan na ngayon. Ito na ngayon. The responsible extraction and equitable distribution of natural resources remain among my non-negotiables. I reiterate the need for the passage of the National Land Use Act which has been pending for decades. Pakisilip lang ho ninyo 'yan. For the rest of my term, I hope to see concerted efforts in protecting the environment. The rehabilitation of Boracay Island showcased our resolve to safeguard the environment. Boracay is doing because of its scenery. If it's only a coconut and a black — white sand and water, wala yan. Pero you add the — the visitors there, then it becomes a tempting destination. We have seen the remarkable reemergence of the Island back to its former glory. I want this sustained. I ask Congress to enact a law creating — importante ito — the Boracay Island Authority or BIDA. We need it. I cannot stress enough the importance of agriculture. The growth of our economy depends on a robust agricultural sector. We must utilize the coconut — ito, isa — we must utilize the for the welfare our coconut farmers and the development of our coconut industry. I urge everybody — both of the Executive Department pati ito — that ito 'yung pera na nakuha doon sa na-sequester. And itong perang malaking ito, gagamitin ito for the welfare of the farmers. The problem is, we can no longer trace who are the farmers of yesterday. Marcos was — Marcos is a distant star. We do not know. Ako, alam ko because we had a little piece also that was covered by the land reform. Hindi na natin malaman kung sino ang may-ari. I think Congress should look again and to sort out how best the money can be utilized. I will not make any suggestion but I leave it to Congress to decide what to do with it. I once again urge both Houses of Congress to pass a version of the bill. Establishing the Coconut Farmers' Trust Fund. Tulungan natin ang ating mga magsasaka pagka hindi mawawala 'yang pera, bilyon 'yan. Jusko po. The… We have learned many lessons along the way. I am also requesting Congress to pass the Rural Agricultural and Fisheries Development Financing System Act. We aim to provide adequate, accessible and affordable food for every Filipino through the Plant, Plant, Plant Program. After the Build, Build, Build… I think this is easier to achieve. A few good men — a few good regional directors, DAR and the dedicated workers down below could make this thing a success. Mas madali ito kaysa Build, Build, Build. Ito Plant, Plant, Plant lang eh. It is more of a the — , how you to convince the farmers to cooperate with government for their benefit. This PhP66-billion agricultural stimulus package will help the agriculture and fisheries sector recover. I hope . We need to build trust and confidence in online transactions, stronger protection for online consumers and enabling measures for online businesses is needed through the enactment of an Internet Transactions Act. (ITA). This is good. I thus direct the Department of Trade and Industry and other relevant agencies to work closely with Congress in ensuring that the provisions of the proposed bill are responsive to the needs of the consumers while promoting the growth of e-Commerce in the country. If you are tired of clapping, you say . I can make a. Shortcut. Pabilisan lang 'yan. On the path to better governance, we travel with others. Partners - both old and new - have helped. For bolstering our antiquated public health system, for bringing home our laid off Filipinos overseas, for filling in supply gaps for crucial medical supplies and equipment and staple food, for these and many more, the Philippines thanks all friendly nations. We will never forget your kindness and your timely support. Within ASEAN and beyond, the Philippines will continue to work with partners to address global perils and ramp up cooperation to secure for our peoples, greater peace, progress and prosperity. The Filipino nation claims its rightful place in the community of sovereign states. Thus, we will continue to pursue an independent foreign policy. Let me be clear about this. May I cut my prepared speech? Alam mo, I read a little over three weeks or last month na the Americans would — intends to go back to Subic. I will put on record my thoughts. I have nothing against America, I have nothing against China but if you put bases here, you will double the spectacle of a destructive thing Manila during the Second World War — during the retaking of this city. One of the devastated cities in the world. Kaya maglagay-lagay ka ng base at this time, this will ensure if war breaks out, because there would be atomic arsenals brought in, this will ensure the extinction of the Filipino race. We worked without fail to protect our rights in the South China Sea, neither beholden nor a pawn to anyone. We broadened the boundaries of Philippine diplomacy. We built productive ties with everyone willing to engage us on the basis of equality and mutual respect. And, we redefined our relationships with our important partners, placing the country in a far better position to advance our interests in an evolving regional order and emerging global problems. Now, plenty of critics, both sides, claim about nothing has been done to retake forcefully or physically the South China Sea. Alam mo, unless we are prepared to go to war, I would suggest that we better call off and treat this, I said, with diplomatic endeavors. China is claiming it. We are claiming it. China has the arms, we do not have it. , it is simple as that. They are in possession of the property. It will remain a property of a — if you're a lawyer, property rights. They are — it has nothing to do with the Philippine Laws of Property but it's akin to — they are in possession. What can we do? We have to go to war and I cannot afford it. Some other president can, but I cannot. Inutil ako diyan, sabihin ko sa inyo. And I'm willing to admit it. Talagang inutil ako diyan. Wala akong magawa. I cannot… The moment I send my Marines there at the coastal shores of Palawan, tinamaan ng cruise missile lahat iyan. Hindi pa nga naka-set sail iyan eh, sabog na. Let me say again that victory in the global battle against COVID-19 would take longer than we expect. Everyone's cooperation is needed. I know that you, the Filipino people, have sacrificed a lot. But we have no other choice but to work together and to do even more. I must admit that our actions have been far from perfect — totoo iyan I admit it — and there could be improvements here or there-but all of us in government, including myself, assure you that we will not stop until we get and better for you. I know that many of you are worried not only about health and safety but also about our ability to move around and ride public transportation; the depletion of your savings due to the rising cost of goods; and the loss of your incomes due to uncertainties in your jobs and livelihood. I assure you that your government will these problems and challenges to overcome them and proceed to the new normal'. Marami ho talagang mawawalaan ng — those for the middle-income. They buy a car on installment basis. If you cannot keep up with the amortization, you'll lose it — you'll lose the car and you are forced to ride on public utilities. Concomitantly, didiretso rin itong mga criminal na rarami at crimes will increase. But let me assure you, for as long as I am President, there can never be a runaway crime in any of our cities. Hindi ako papayag ng ganun. I can assure you we will remain peaceful —. Peaceful. Hindi naman peaceful. Pero kung sabihin mo na kagaya ng holdup dito, holdup, ah… Alam naman nila kung ano mangyayari. You know what will happen to you. I am addressing myself to the criminals. You commit holdups, you commit rapes, you commit all sorts of and you harm the public, then kaaway mo na ako. Kapag bumalik kayo sa dati kagaya noon, patong-patong na. Naman ang patay dito. Sigurado hahanapin ko kayo. Do not ever go back to your old ways. Maghanap na lang kayo ng anong trabaho diyan. Magtiis kayo. To open up the economy to pre-Covid-19 levels at this time is not an option because good it can produce will only be gobbled up, or be outweighed, by the bad it will generate. Sometimes, haste does make waste. The recent upsurge of infections when we opened little windows to the resumption of business is proof of that. I am happy that I have talked to you today. You know, in other places they opened up early soon. America is one. China — fortunately, it was arrested on time. China and the rest for those who opened up and those who do not follow the protocols of the — at least the World Health Organization — they are suffering and they have at least 140 deaths. Ang Amerika nagkukulang sila lahat. No nation on earth was prepared for COVID. No amount of preparation because that kind of microbes visits about once every 100 years. Wala man yung — mga tatay natin, what they suffered was Second World War, but tayo… We are not ready and therefore we will not gamble with the lives and health of the people. , no one would want to end up on the negative side of the equation. Not me, not us. All I ask is that you continue to put your faith in your government and work with us in achieving what is best for our country and our people. Together, let us do — mahirap basahin kasi dito eh — the that we can to ensure that the health, safety and -being of every Filipino- those severely affected -are taken care of. Together, we shall fight this pandemic with the same fervor as our campaign against illegal drugs, criminality, insurgency, and corruption in high places and entrenched parochial interests. As a government worker, I am addressing each and every Filipino that the government cannot do this without your help. More than ever, we need to. Reinvigorate the deep-seated Filipino spirit of pakisama and malasakit within each and everyone of us. We are being — we are being tested, as a people and as a nation. Worse times loom ahead. But I do hope that this spirit of solidarity and unity will serve as the drumbeat to which we shall march in unison in our quest for the light at the end of the tunnel. I appeal to each and every Filipino, let us take care of one another. Ito ang panahon para magtulungan. Hindi ito ang panahon para maglamanan — maglaman — lamang-lamangan — lamang. Mamang p*** — dila. Ko. Hindi maglamang — at pagkakaisa. My faith in the Filipino innate patience, resilience and determination to bounce back is unwavering. Let us share our blessings with those who have little and those who have none. This is the time to bring out the best in us. The woes that weigh upon our shoulders may bend our back, but they shall not bend or break our spirit. From the rubbles of adversity, a more resilient and stronger nation built on Bayanihan and Pagkakaisa shall rise. Together, we shall overcome. Before I… Pardon the time but it was the allotted time for my speech. I would to give a statement between — between us sa gobyerno kung hindi tayo nagkakaintindihan. You know Drilon, stand it — he was defending… I would to ask Drilon, were you a part of ACCRA when this contract of Ayala water was being drafted? And why are you fumigating? Bakit kasi ikaw lang ang galit? Na sabi mo na dynasty-dynasty. You are a hypocrite. You know that you cannot pass an anti-dynasty law. Ikaw ang nandiyan sa Congress, di ikaw ang mauna dito. But you know, to take it against me for protecting my country is something which I resent. Alam mo you described using the dictionary the synonym ng mga oligarchs, oligarchy, kung ano, then you proceeded to characterize everyone every — every name and then said that oligarchy is not bad at all because sa — not all oligarchies are bad. True. But ito, to my countrymen, the oligarchy that exists in this country is the oligarchy that existed during the Spanish time. And the Spanish lands and the friar lands and all the benefits that were passed on to the Insulares who did not go back to Spain or to the Spaniards and into their… But that was long ago, it has been forgotten. This is the oligarchy that controls the Philippines by what? By taking control of the water and the electricity and power. Iyan ang oligarchy mo Drilon. Wala ng oligarchy dito except that. They have controlled. Look at… How can you now craft a new contract? Because I would insist that you pay the billions and billions that you collected. For example, water treatment. O nandiyan sa kontrata. It's in the billing, they are being collected since 1997. Ilang bilyon na nga wala ni isa, not even a faucet was built for a water treatment facility. Iyan ang mahirap sa… You do not protect the oligarchs here. You are the one. Ikaw lang mag-isa. And I suspect that you were also the one — or helped when you were there in the ACCRA. We do not even know the — ang mga abogado sa public documents hindi nga alam. Hindi nga natin alam kung naka-graduate ba o hindi. Wala. Would you think Ayala would get the services of those…? Ayala got ACCRA. ACCRA did it. Ikaw galing ka doon, of you, more successful lawyers sa corporation, you handle big corporate. Iyan ang mahirap. Bangga tayo dito. Me, hinawakan ninyo eh. Hindi ka puwede kay… Kita mo noong nag-increase, walang tubig, pinuputol yung tubig, ang tao bumigay kasi hindi puwede man tayo hindi maligo, hindi uminom. Electricity ayaw mo mag-increase. O ayan, wala ka, palaging brownout, lahat. I'm sorry but I have to say this to you. I do not it. It's not the time for it, but since it is the time for the SONA, for people to know and people to get the facts, then — and the of the people to be heard. Tayo na naman ang tao magsabi. Hinawakan ninyo yang tubig pati electricity, iyon ang oligarchy talaga. Kaya ako sinabi ko noong kampanya. -corruption is not here.? Iyang mga Customs na yan, maliit yan. It's there upstairs. And I was — and providential, dumating yung panahon na hindi ko hiningi. Then I saw the contract. Noong nakita ko yung contract… At saka yang linya na ano, yung choice — trans — yung linya ng ano, it belongs to government. The best of the transmission lines, , government gets it first before anybody else. Thank you. I am through. Thank you. Kindly sit down. Kumusta po kayo? Senate President Vicente Sotto III and the honorable members of the Senate; House Speaker Alan Peter Cayetano and the honorable members of the House of Representatives; Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo, magandang hapon po sa inyo — sa iyo, ma'am, kung nasaan ka; former Presidents Fidel V. Ramos, Joseph Ejercito, Macapagal- Arroyo ; His Excellency Caccia and the esteemed members of the diplomatic corps; Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea and the other members of the Cabinet; Chief Justice Lucas Bersamin and the Supreme Court; my fellow workers in government; mga mahal kong kababayan. Let me by extending my hand in gratitude to all who kept faith with me in our trying times. Numbers speak a thousand words and tell a hundred tales. But the landslide victory of the Administration candidates as as the latest survey results shows that my disapproval rating is. 3%. I hope that the members of Congress — sana hindi kayo included sa 3% — inspires me with determination to pursue relentlessly what we have started at the of my administration. Few men imbued with the will and the courage to do what he believes is and and be the opposition in terms of numbers and noise, makes a majority. For it is not the eagle in the fight but the fight in the eagle that matters. Believe me, I will end my term fighting. It has been three years since I took my oath of office, and it pains me to say that we have not learned our lesson. The illegal drug problem persists. Corruption continues and emasculates the courage we need to sustain our moral recovery initiatives. Years ago, we saw the terrible devastation caused by illegal drugs. On May 23, 2017, our law enforcers launched an operation to serve a warrant and to neutralize terrorists. A group of armed men with sophisticated weaponry and aided by locals radicalized by extremist dogma and teachings fought our troops for weeks. During that Marawi Siege, tons of shabu worth millions and millions of pesos. Drug money killed 175 and wounded of my soldiers and policemen in that five-month battle. I am aware that we still have a long way to go in our fight against this social menace. Let the reason why I advocate the imposition of the death penalty for crimes related to illegal drugs. Our citizens have begun to do their part in the war against drugs, and through the barangay formation of anti-drug councils, and also surrendering bricks of cocaine found floating in the sea into our islands. I call this responsibility. However, the drugs will not be crushed unless we continue to eliminate corruption that allows this social monster to survive. I respectfully request Congress to reinstate the death penalty for heinous crimes related to drugs, as as plunder. My countrymen, it is a sad commentary that we cannot distinguish our need from our greed, our principles from our prejudices, the from the fake, and the truth from a lie. The reason is because that many of us, what matters above all is the "self." It is selfishness its worst for no purpose other than personal aggrandizement. To borrow the language of F. Sionil Jose, we have not risen above and beyond the parochial interests. Our warped loyalty to family, friends and tribal kin continue to exact a heavy toll on our programs designed to uplift the poor and reassure our investors, our foreign investors local, and the business sector in this country. The recent uncovering of the massive fraud perpetrated against the public health insurance system proves that corruption is pervasive. Huge amounts of medical funds were released to cover padded medical claims and imaginary treatment of ghost patients. I am grossly disappointed. The government is conned of millions of pesos which could be used to treat illnesses and save the lives of many. Thus I ordered the NBI to arrest and cause the prosecution of those liable. I appointed a new PhilHealth President, whom I know is a man of integrity, a military man, a former military officer, and gave him marching orders to prioritize ridding the agency of corruption. By the way, I commend the Bureau of Investigation for its handling of high profile cases resulting in the arrest and prosecution of criminals. These culprits will have their day of reckoning in court. I hope it happens during the last three years of my term. Concerning the unscrupulous persons manning our ports and scalawags in uniform, we have been unyielding in our reforms to weed them out of public service. I have fired or caused the resignation of more than a hundred officials and appointees of government without regard to relationship, friendship and alliance. There is no sacred cow, as the saying goes, in my Administration. Institutions that are the stewards of our resources and agents of development have long been a major source of public frustration. Drastic reforms within these agencies have yielded results. Our government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), infamous for high salaries and bonuses being paid their executives and employees, have started to shape up. As of July 9, 2019, we collected more than P61 billion from GOCCs or government corporations, 32% of which, or P16 billion, from PAGCOR. This is more than the P36 billion collected in 2017. My salute to Andrea. Domingo. Magpasugal ka pa, ma'am, nang. Marami. Bureau of Customs, though corruption-ridden, managed to collect Five Hundred Eighty Five Billion Pesos (P585,000,000,000) in 2018. Imagine how more could have been collected had the BOC been clean and less corrupt. May I cut and — magsalita lang ako kung anong sa isip ko. I went to the Bureau of Customs two weeks ago and found out that there were about 63 of them facing charges, criminal charges, and 61 of them under investigation. I hope that I can have the cooperation of Congress if we cannot abolish their position. And if I cannot dismiss them for the reason that there is a security of tenure, I will allow them to have their plantilla positions but they have to report to Congress everyday to help me in the huge paperwork that we have to do everyday. All of them will go out from the premises of the Customs area. I do not want them back. We, in government, talk , act little, and slow. I recall saying that before the Congressional hearing when I was Mayor of Davao City. I say that again to emphasize how little we have changed since then. We are long on rhetorics but short on accomplishments. It's either you Congress or — even the Executive department and me. I am here to rectify my own error. That is why, I implore those who occupy positions of power and authority, to let your deeds and accomplishments do the talking. Lead by example. Words ring hollow when not followed by positive and prioritized action. Time and again, I have emphasized that my fellow workers in government, trabahante lang po ako ng Pilipino. Last year, I assign — I signed the Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act, a significant piece of legislation to improve service delivery and fight corruption, still until now. However, to be done in ensuring our responsiveness to the people's needs. Based on complaints received by the Contact Center Bayan, Contact Center Bayan — that's in my office — the LTO, SSS, BIR, LRA, and PAG-IBIG are the top five agencies that need to drastically improve their service. I reiterate my government — my directive to the government and instrumentalities, including the LGUs and the government corporations: simplify. May I… Nandito ba kayo? Simplify. The others. You can do it electronically. You do not have to go to the office. I've been asking that from you since three years ago. 'Pag hindi pa ninyo nagawa 'yan ngayon, papatayin ko talaga kayo. Nabubwisit na… Simplify and make your services responsive to — client-friendly. Your client is the Filipino, our employer — from where the money in our pockets come from, from our salaries. Thanks to Executive Secretary Medialdea, we have increased the number of lines Hotline 8888 to make it more responsive to the public. Our ultimate goal is for our people to be freed from using these hotlines because government service and response have markedly improved. Again, I will… Ang problema kasi ng Fili — I'm addressing now to the Filipino. Kayo rin kasi sinasabi ko na sa inyo, be assertive. At 'pag kayo o ikaw hiningian more than the required payment by government at humingi pa sa iyo, I've been telling you mag-eskandalo kayo sa opisina. Make a scene. Sampalin mo 'yang p***** i** na 'yan. Kasi aabot rin sa akin 'yan. And I have done that. Ako mag-prangka ako sa inyo, ako lang ang Presidente na hanggang ngayon nagbubugbog talaga ng tao diyan sa loob ng Malacañan. Pinapakain ko ng pera 'yang mga y*** na 'yan. Eh galit na ako sa inyo eh. Kindly be assertive. Pagka hiningian ka, sabihin mo, "T*** *** mo. Sabi ni Duterte, the President told us, that if you extort money from me, I will slap you.". At sampalin talaga ninyo. Hindi na bale magkaaway. I will defend you. At kung maaari and this is what I've been doing all along. There's an . Be sure that it is true. Though you are not liable for libel pero huwag naman 'yang makasakit ka ng kapwa-tao na wala namang kasalanan. , then place "To President Duterte, re: abuses by the director asking for money." Text mo, lalabas 'yan diyan. And that is for the public to view. At kung totoo, Malacañan, I said, is open 24 hours — 24 hours basta corruption. And that is why that fiasco about the frigate ni Trillanes was because 'yung Koreano na napagbili ng barko, who sold the ship to the Philippine government, wala pa hong delivery. And it was there already ready. And that is why that Korean went to Malacañan to complain why is it that there is no request for delivery. I told Bong, "Bong, ayusin mo 'yan." He went to Lorenzana and Lorenzana nagsulat siya. May nakakuha because sa Malacañan, every administration may tao 'yan diyan. Every administration leaves some of the men because they are appointed on plantilla position. Eh kinuha nila then it was brought here, before the Congress. And Bong was called to testify. And he said, he was assured it will be a closed-door. I told Bong, "No, ask for an open and public hearing.". Sabi ko, "Sabihin mo sa lahat — wala — you have nothing. Say the truth." Sabi ko, pagkatapos niya testify, sabi ko, "Bong, maniwala ka hindi, you will be a senator." Totoo 'yan. That is the story of how convoluted politics and corruption here in our country works. Equipped with political will, the government ordered the closure of Boracay Island for six months to prevent its further deterioration. We cleaned and rehabilitated the island and I allowed it to heal naturally. I am proud to say that it has been restored close to its original pristine state. Boracay Inter- Agency Task Force led by Secretary Cimatu, and supported by Secretaries Año, Romulo-Puyat — Oh what's her name? Puro surname ito,. Romulo-Puyat. What's her name? Ah si — ah Berna. Ah, Berna Romulo- Puyat, Bello and Villar, and then TESDA Chief Mamondiong for this huge success. Kudos are also due to the PMS for integrating the six-month Rehabilitation Plan, and the NEDA for the recently-approved -term Boracay Action Plan. Boracay Island is the beginning. And the girls there, the foreigners are waiting for you gentlemen to visit the place. They are all on the beach sunbathing. You are invited to — I have not been there. Alam mo, nung naayos 'yan, day before we were told that there's gonna be an opening tomorrow. On the TV on that day, Magandang Hapon, showed a lot of buntings and banners, "Salamat Duterte." when I saw it, I called the military and the police, "Remove the buntings. I am not going there." No need to arbi — ah advertise. I am paid for what I'm doing. Nakokornihan ako. Adulation, bordering pretentions. I can always smell it a mile away. And I never went there until now. What I did was I went to the other side of the island and asked the DAR, "What is the status of the land behind the beach of Boracay?" And they are still categorized as forestal and agriculture. "Not…" I said, "Not commercial?" "No, sir.". I told the Agrarian Reform, "Go to the place, have it inspected because I will declare the whole of the island a land reform program." And I gave the islands piece by piece to the Atis, the natives of the place para walang masabi. Marami kasi ginawa ko raw para linisan ko, ibigay ko sa mga kaibigan ko. Wala akong kaibigang mayaman. Ayaw kong kaibigan ng mayaman because pagka mayaman ka, tatabi ka lang sa akin, pati ako napahiran na ng kung ano-ano ang hingiin mo sa gobyerno. There are those who violate environmental rules. I am giving due notice to the LGUs and other stakeholders, kayo po, of tourist destinations to take extra steps in the enforcement of our laws and the protection of our environment. On January 27, 2019, we officially started the Manila Bay rehabilitation. Though we have a long way to go, we are encouraged by the test results of the waters near Padre Faura. We will relocate informal settlers — I hope it can happen during my time — along the waterways and shut down establishments that continue to pollute and poison our waters. Make a choice. I'm going to the… I'm going to dismantle your burning — ah building — or burn it down that we can have a new set-up of environmental friendly, that means. Through the Build, Build, Build Program in emerging economic hubs outside Metro Manila. This will swiftly gain ground, thanks to the efforts of the Economic Team led by Secretary Dominguez. Hard at work in the interconnection of our islands and cities by air, land, and sea are Secretaries Tugade and Villar. Alam naman ninyo. Magaganda na ang airport ninyo. Inuna ko nga kayo eh. Everybody's complaining about the Davao airport and I said, "Davao will be the last." Kung hindi na maabutan, sabi ko mga taga-Davao, pasensya na kayo. Para walang masabi ang Congress sa atin, baka nga 3% sila doon sa kabila. We also paved the way for the entry of third telecommunications provider. Do not worry about this. There is no corruption at all. I guarantee you, upon the grave of my father. I do not allow — I do not talk to them. I say: do your work. And kung maaari, according to what the specifications are required by this government. I challenge this new player to fulfill its commitment to provide fast and reliable telecommunication services to our people, in the underserved areas. DICT Secretary Honasan will be the lead man in this endeavor. I hope he is here. However, developmental gains will not be felt by our people in the countryside if we cannot maintain law and order. 'Yang peace and security, wala 'yan. We need to enforce the law. After almost two decades of peace negotiation, the Bangsamoro Organic Law was finally passed and ratified. For decades, our Muslim brothers in the ARMM have been mired in poverty. My late Muslim brother, MinDA Chair Abdul Khayr Alonto, envisioned a progressive, peaceful, and united Mindanao during our lifetime. It is my hope that the Bangsamoro Transition will fast-track the establishment of regional government that will secure and comfortable life for Muslim brothers and sisters, and all indigenous communities in the Bangsamoro Regions. Additionally, I have taken the helm of the National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict and have assigned a Cabinet member to each region to harmonize government efforts in attaining national development security. Through the exceptional leadership of Secretary Briones and the DepEd, I am proud to say that this year more Filipino learners are receiving basic education, with over 27 million enrollees from Kinder to Senior High School. And because we have still a little to spare, the fastest population growth, one of the — is the Philippines. We are industrious that we are producing more people than… I do not want to quarrel with the religious but… More than — sorry my eyes is not good — for the… Isinusuot ko lang 'to 'pag mag — paminsan-minsan eh. Out-of-school youth and adult learners were able to access non-formal education through the Alternative Learning System. For our national sports development, I support the proposed measure to create the National Academy of Sports for High School students. Almost 86,000 micro, small, and medium enterprises or the MSMEs have received over P3 billion worth of loans since 2017, thanks to the efforts of Secretary Lopez and the DTI. Additional benefits for solo parents, the assignment of health workers in all barangays, and the expansion of the Malasakit Centers, are what we also hope to achieve through the bills filed by the original concept of Bong Go. Para manalo sa kampanya, 'yon ang mantra niya. Totohanin mo lang, Bong, mapahiya tayong lahat. I also implore Congress… You — look. You have to study this carefully. Congress has to postpone the May 2020 elections and 'yung Barangay, Sangguniang Kabataan to October 2022. Because if you read it,. This… To rectify the truncated terms. Paiba-iba na eh. The truncated terms of sitting barangays but also provide them with the ample time to finish their programs and projects. I suggest Congress should also enact the Magna Carta for Barangays. This Administration's malasakit at serbisyo program has, of course, reached the Filipinos who labor in foreign lands. The milestone signing of the Bilateral Labor Agreement with Kuwait in 2018 is a testament of my commitment to stop abuses inflicted on our overseas Filipinos. To ensure their welfare, protection and their access to government services, the establishment of the Department of Overseas Filipinos will sufficiently address this particular need. Our accomplishments for the past three years and the plans for the next three are discussed in detail in my mid-term report to the people, copies of which shall be made available before the day ends. Let me repeat what I said many times before. Honestly, I have identified the enemy who dumped us into this quagmire we are in. I have met the enemy face-to-face and sadly, the enemy is "us." We are our own tormentors — addressing the Filipino people — we are our own demons; we are as rapacious predators preying on the helpless, the weak and the voiceless. We find corruption everywhere in government with every malefactor watching his cohort's back in blatant disregard of his oath when he assumed public office. Even the language has evolved to soften the wickedness of the criminal act. "For the Boys", "sponsoring an event" or what-else-have-you. No amount of euphemism can trivialize or normalize betrayal of public trust or any other criminal offense. It is an injury laced with insult. It is both a national embarrassment and a national shame. For every transaction, a commission; for every action, extortion; and a request that goes on and on - endlessly and shamelessly. Catharsis is what we, individually and collectively, need to do today - not tomorrow but today. Self-purgation followed by the resolve to do what is and proper, is good for the nation's health. Let me ask you: When will corruption end? Kailan ba talaga 'to? Hanggang kailan? , I don't know. I've been in — with government for almost 35 years now. I am not singling out myself. It's the entire gamut of our system. Corruption exasperates. It frustrates. It is also exasperating that there are times when I think that it is blood that we need to cleanse and rinse away the dirt and the muck that stick to the flesh leeches. Of course, it is only a thought. I am thinking aloud. To dispel any controversy that my statements in this regard will create something else. Words of Pedro Guerrero who said, "Sometimes they write what I say and they write — and they write what I say and not what I mean." 'yung. Mga pa-purga-purga lang diyan. I use similes, metaphors, hyperbole, and other figures of speech every now and then, to prove or stress a point. I am as human as anybody else. On the matter of the Philippine — West Philippine Sea. The avoidance of conflict — armed conflict and protection of our territorial waters and natural resources compel us to perform a delicate balancing act. A shooting war is grief and misery multiplier. War leaves widows and orphans in its wake. I am not ready or inclined to accept the occurrence of more destruction, more widows and more orphans, should war, even on a limited scale, breaks. Out. More and better results can be reached in the privacy of a conference room than in a squabble in public. That is why I will do in the peaceful way, mindful of the fact that it is our national pride and territorial integrity that are at stake. Short of expressly advocating a call to arms, there are those who say that we should stand up and stop those who fish in our economic zone. Of course we will do in due time. There is… Alam mo ganito 'yan eh. Noong — when I became President and when the M16 rifles were cancelled by America upon the prodding of the US Congress, I found myself in a quandary because reports were already ripe na there was the passing of arms in Marawi. And because of the arms were already — in the hands of the police, hands-me-down from the army were old and sometimes the bolt that pushes the bullet flies out and the barrel has become lose, and there are no more launch and planes to push it into a circular trajectory to maintain its accuracy. I was forced to go to China. Eh mabuti't na lang nasabi ko sa inyo 'to. Then in China, we had a bilateral. I brought along the military man — Año, the chief of staff then, and all of them, Lorenzana, Esperon, National Security. In that meeting, I said — Cabinet members were there — "I want to go to my territory to dig oil." That was the word, "I dig." Because that is ours. Ang sabi ni President Xi, ", you know there is a conflict there. Do you think, than go there and have a confrontation — not the grey ships, war ships. But you know a squabble there could lead to something else." Sabi niya, we became friends. And we can talk. About this. But not an outright precipitate move because… He said it softly, "It can mean trouble.". If the trouble comes out from the mouth of a president of a republic, anong magawa ko? What did I answer? " then , sir, we can talk about this at some other time." But , before I go, we must talk about the West Philippine Sea. We cannot you know, have our cake and eat it . You know, I cannot go there even to bring the Coast Guard to drive them away. China also claims the property and he is in possession. 'Yan ang problema. Sila 'yung in possession and claiming all the resources there as an owner. We are claiming the same but we are not in the position because of that fiasco noong dalawang nag-standoff doon during the time of my predecessor si Albert, ambassador. If I'm correct. I do not know his name. Tayo ang umatras. Pagsabi niya umatras, that was a kind of a compromise. Tayo ang umatras. Noong umatras tayo, pumasok sila. Marami na. That day, we lost the Spratly and the Panganiban Island. Iyan ang totoo. Walang bolahan 'yan. Ngayon, may arbitral ruling. I… I said, I could not even ask for the oil claiming the entire resources of the… Anong sabihin ko sa kanila? Kaya sinabi ko, "Let us do this mutually." Of course, when Xi says, "I will fish," who can prevent him? And sabi ko naman, "We will fish because we claim it.". And sabi ko, "Please allow because…" Before that, they were driving away our fishermen. 'Di ba inaabog nila? Kaya sabi ko, "Do not drive them away because the Filipinos are of the belief that they are also — they claim it.". Now, if you deprive — deprive the Filipinos of — there, magkagulo talaga 'yan. And it could lead to ano — not war, and I said, "we have to…". Kaya ang sabi ko… When I said, "I allowed," that was on the premise that I own the property. Pero hindi tayo in control of the property. Ayan magsabi sila, "Of course, I will allow you." Kaya pinabalik. Eh 'yung disgrasya, 'yung pagsabi "a mere incident — legal, marine incident," 'yan ang ginagamit sa batas 'yan, "a marine incident happened." Hindi naman sinasabi na "marine accident.". It was nabanggan, wala naman. They wanted to talk, tapos ayaw dito. And, "sige, we will investigate and you investigate, and when you are ready, we should meet and compare notes, and let us determine who pays for what damage.". Ganun lang. Ipadala ko 'yung marines ko to drive away the Chinese fishermen. I guarantee you, not one of them will come home alive. Kung ipadala ko 'yung limang — pati 'yung frigate ko na bago, 'yung pinagkaguluhan nila ni Trillanes diyan sa — that made Bong a Senator, ubos 'yan because there are already guided missiles in that island. And the fastest that they have installed there can reach Manila in seven minutes. You want war? Alam mo, asaran 'yan eh. Supladuhan 'yan. Kung supladuhan lang, murahin, "P***** i** mo, l**** ka. Umalis ka diyan.". Kung ganunan lang, bright ako diyan. Hanggang bunganga lang. Pero kung bunutan na ng baril, ah pwede siguro basta dalawa lang. But the problem is, there — whether we do it in a diplomatic way, there will be heated arguments, sigurado 'yan. We do it in a confrontation doon. We to drive them away, it could lead to a violence. Any way 'yan. By the way the President answered when I said "I will dig my oil" the first time I went to China. Nakita ko 'yung tao eh. You can, more or less, draw a profile of his, "Please do not do that because there will be trouble." Ano… Anong magagawa ko? I go there, I said, "The fisheries who were…" And besides, I was invoking 'yung traditional fishing rights. It is in that arbitral ruling. Ayaw lang ninyong gustong tignan. It is mentioned there that even before countries were in existence, people around an ocean or a lake had already been fishing there for generations. And that is why fishing rights are allowed in the many cases between Finland and Germany, decided by UNCLOS — UNCLOS and the International Law of the Seas. UNCLOS is a product of a treaty. That treaty is also a part of our land because we are a signatory. Eh kung basahin lang ninyo 'yan nang husto, it is there. You … China and everybody recognizes traditional fishing rights for the natives who were there even before the creation of republics and governments. That law is a humane law. I'm sorry I have to… I promised you 40 minutes. My God, I… You want me to stop? We can go home now. I have exceeded my… There is the, you know, there is a time for everything. Do not believe the others because they are not my friends. They are my political enemies. They said I do not believe in God. Who says? I am a believer of a universal mind there. But I do not believe that a God perfect would create hell for his creation. What kind of God is he? He is not my God. There is a time to — for everything. A time to negotiate and a time to quarrel with your enemy, with your political opponents or with your wife. That is why some lives here are… And a time to antagonize and a time to make peace and a time to go to war, and a time to live and a time to die. That's Ecclesiastes 3. Our ownership of the Philippine — West Philippine Sea is internationally recognized. However, both the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the Arbitral Award in the case of People — "Republic of the Philippines vs. People's Republic of China" recognize instances where another state may utilize the resources found within the coastal state's Exclusive Economic Zone. The arbitral ruling even states, the one that they are charging me for violating the Constitution…. Sino gani 'yon? Suntukin lang kita diyan ngayon mabuti pa. Nandito eh. The arbitral ruling even states that the Philippines may enter into fishing agreements with other states, provided certain conditions and requisites in the UNCLOS are met. 'yung akin, sabi niya, "Let's go fish." Sabi ko, "You have to act…" You know, they have been there fishing since time immemorial. I think it was Adam who got the first Lapu-Lapu there. Let me assure you, that national honor and territorial integrity shall not — shall be foremost in our mind, and when we may take the next steps in this. Smoldering controversy over the lines of arbitral ruling, the West Philippine Sea is ours. There is no ifs and buts. It is ours. But we have been acting, along that legal truth and line. But we have to temper it with the times and the realities that we face today. Poverty incidence fell from 27.6 percent in the first half of 2015 to 21 percent in the first half of 2018. The important number, though, is the six million Filipinos we need to pull out from poverty. Kindly help me on this. And you know, as I said, corruption is everywhere. You are free to investigate. I don't take offense. If there is anything wrong in my department, the Executive, you are free to open the investigation anytime. You do not have to call me. Call the idiots, expose them, and send them to jail. You are helping me. Do not be… I am not… I've been a prosecutor. I know how it works. Feel free. Feel free to expose anything that is not in accordance with law. We have pursued tax reforms to fund our poverty reduction programs. I therefore implore Congress to immediately pass Package 2 of the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program, or the TRABAHO Bill, which shall gradually lower the income — corporate income tax, and rationalize and improve fiscal incentives. It will energize our MSMEs and encourage them to expand their business and generate, — I'm missing the word para sabihin na "you're all talk" — million jobs in the coming years. The MSMC — MSMEs hold the promise of raising a lot of the Filipinos. I therefore believe that it is now time for Congress to approve a new version of the Salary Standardization Law. Ngayon na. And to the teachers, alam mo dito who toil and work tirelessly to educate our young. Kasali na po dito 'yung hinihingi ninyo. Hindi naman masyadong malaki, pero it will tide you over during these hard times. A little bit bigger than before. This is intended to increase the salaries of national government workers, including teachers and nurses. Nurses, correct. I am also asking Congress to pass the remaining packages of my Administration's Tax Reform Program, and the bills that would further raise excise taxes on — good, let us do it — tobacco and alcohol. Sinong naninigarilyo dito? They should be exterminated from the face of the earth. They are the ones… You know, I… I'm… I do not hide my -. — what's wrong with me. I acquired Buerger's disease because I smoke. But I made it a national policy because you know when I was new mayor, I went around to see the discos and night clubs. I could see the faces of the people inside. You have to wade into a thick smoke to recognize one. That's when I decided. But I was still smoking. But I decided because I knew, I already had it. It's time to — sabi ko. And a national law, para lahat na, that at 12 o' clock, everything closes. I am not trying to pull a chair here. Mine was that two o'clock noon sa Davao, it was two then I reduced it to one. When that boxing mayor there became mayor, she reduced it to six. Walang order, no orders in advance. Kasi we have ordered already, you can close but we have to drink. Itong ngayon, at 12, everything closes down. Nobody works. I… I think that we should adopt it. Of the states, in many states, in many countries, ganun man. Alas dose, sarado na talaga. We have to stop drinking. And jukebox, they're only good up to eight, nine. Eight, maganda 'yan. It's a… It's there in every corner, store. Blares out noise and the children who will go to school and the working class, and you are there with your store. I have prohibited it in Davao. And at 12, as you see, Davao is quiet because everybody is resting already. Be it in the memorial parks, cemetery, or in the comfort of their homes. The valuation system has also to be improved local government units and rationalize capital income. I urge Congress to review and pass the Government Rightsizing Bill to reconfigure the existing Metro Manila-centric bureaucracy; streamline government systems in order to deliver services without delay and within a short timeline. These reforms would be for naught if we cannot avert of a "new poor" every time a disaster strikes. The Philippine experience has shown that natural disasters and — are poverty creators. That is why, we need to hasten the establishment of a Department of Disaster Resilience (DDR) that these department focus on the natural hazards and climate change. I urge Congress to fast-track the passage of the Administration of this bill — Administration version . In 2017, I reminded all of you of the probable consequence of a catastrophic earthquake in Metro Manila and its surrounding provinces. Since then, I have established the Project Management Office for the Earthquake Resilience and the Greater Manila Area to implement two-pronged strategy on earthquake resilience and mitigation efforts. I heard, it's not in my speech. I heard that from a psychic that the first crack when the "Big One" hits, will be here in the center of. This… 'Yan man ang sabi nila. "Philippines is corrupt, it's lousy that if you kill all congressmen, senators and the president, we will have a new. Day." I pray that if the earthquake comes, it comes now. This moment. Kumpleto na tayo. May madamay pa tayo doon sa harap. We weathered one damaging effect of climate change this year. The El Niño were wreaked havoc in the agricultural sector and caused water shortage in the greater Metro Manila area. We need to pass bill creating the Department of Water Resources and Water Regulatory Commission. Alam mo, the agencies and the guys there handling the — the entire water works system — you have to change it immediately. You know what, there was this three-day no water. I was in Davao. Everybody was complaining and I was even afraid to come here because what if my girlfriend will not be able to — to take a bath. She will smell hell. I said, I'll wait for the water to wash her. Alam mo kung hindi ako nagmura, kung hindi ko sinabi, "p**** i**, papatayin ko kayo, p**** i** niyo." And then when I arrived in the morning, there was water. And my girlfriend was fresh. I also call on Congress to pass a law mandating a Fire Protection Modernization Program. Diyan tayo nagka-ano. If you go to Davao, you'll. Find the best. The best of everything, 911, all the cameras, all the screens. We did that if you can find it. Alam mo — alam mo sabi ni… Is there… Sonny is here? Secretary Dominguez? Ah Sonny. Siya man ang magyayabang. Sabi niya, "marami tayong pera". Pero 'pag tanungin namin siya doon sa Cabinet meeting, "tsk tsk tsk tsk, walang pera, walang pera". Si Diokno ganun rin kaya gi-tapon ko sa Central Bank. Every time sabihin mo, you know we discussed projects, we plan and we submit it to Congress, it's final imprimatur. Eh 'di kami ang, "May pera ba tayo diyan, sir? "Wala." "Magkano?" "Four billion." "Tsk tsk tsk tsk tsk that is not the tsk tsk practice. No money, no money." P***. Saan pala ang pera natin dito? Sa bulsa ninyo? Karaming collection natin dito. But Sonny says that we can fund. This one we have to answer. Now, I would to remind… Pagbigyan na lang ninyo ako tutal para naman ito sa lahat. Alas-sais pa nga ginugutom na kayo. Hindi pala kayo nag- merienda? Alam mo, ever since na-integrate 'yan you would notice in your cities and provinces the deterioration of the service itself. Wala ng mga truck, luma na. And would you believe it in Davao City, I'll show it to you, we have a. 1934 Studebaker fire truck. Maganda pa. We have to — we have to do better than this. There are other cities which are utterly — - utterly without the tools to respond the challenges of fire. We have to come up with something that is good. I mean at this age, it would be a shame if you cannot put up a fire in two days, three days, my God. We have to set aside. Sonny, you have the money? Oh yes. Oh see. Basta sa maraming tao mahiya man mag-deny. Totoo 'yan. Totoo 'yan. We have the money Sonny can give you a figure that we can set aside. Nakakahiya talaga itong ano natin. Ang Davao, meron. Davao has a good 911. Hindi ako nagyayabang. And we have cameras in every corners that's why we can solve crimes immediately. And meron kaming 911. "What is your emergency?" That's the standard. It's fire, they call the fire department. Sabi ko, "911." "Yes." "What's your emergency?" "I — I seemed to lost my -. — to have lost my girlfriend." "We know you, Mayor. You go back to Manila there are plenty left there. Go.". This will equip the fire — Bureau of Fire Protection with tools to respond to the challenges. I further ask Congress to urgently pass the Na — ito — the National Land Use Act or NALUA within this year. Paki lang po. That we can proceed with the new… , we can meet the — the demands of the new investors coming in. Ang lupa natin ang problema eh. A science-based national land use plan would serve as basis for the LGUs in crafting respective development plans, and help disperse economic activities to the countryside. The dispersion of economic and business activities to Visayas and Mindanao is not a campaign promise. It is an economic imperative and a key to our country's sustainable and equitable development. We will encourage investments that would develop the rural areas and Metro Manila and other mega urban areas. Let me cut here, tutal maliit na lang. I would to remind everybody. No offense intended to the mayors and governors to the local government. Pero 'yang style ninyo na it takes about three days, four days for the employees of a certain company, store, or to go back and forth, back and forth. When they go back, you have a new regulation. He gets it, he secures it and when he goes back, oh there's still you have to follow — you have to get this paper. I will tell you now. Hindi ako nagyayabang. In Davao, it's one hour unless there is a need for ocular inspection. I am directing you publicly mayors — mayors. I am directing also the DILG, Secretary Año of the local government to see to it that this is honored. All clearances, permits emanating from your office that would need also your approval, must be out at the least within three days. You do not do that. I am directing si Secretary Año, is he here, sir? Nandito ka? Oh Secretary Año, he is the former chief of staff, he's also a military man. I want three days, unless there is an exceptional reason, three days, para hindi na magpa-balik-balik kasi diyan ang perahan eh. Pagdating doon meron na naman hingin, pagdating doon may hingin. Kaya I said the Filipinos if it is done to you, I'm telling you, slap the guy, create a scene, create a scandal because that incident however little will reach me. And if it does, you can be sure, if I do not call you and the idiot, I will go there myself. That is a promise, that is a pledge. Make it a part of my oath of office. Lahat kayo diyan pati 'yang tsk — easement, under Villar, na. Pero 'yang easement billion dollar — ah billion pesos, if it's a foreign company, it's a billion dollar thing. Ganun 'yan. Pabalik-balik at hindi binabayaran. That's why nagpatong… If all moneys and revenues due government are collected in good faith, marami tayong pera. I'm telling you as President. Marami tayong pera para extra money to uplift the — the mass of Filipinos who are suffering. Maski ospital lang and housing. Jobs, it's the economy that runs it. If the economy is good, more jobs. At the meantime, itong hospitalization, education, the basic at saka itong relocation. Kaawa talaga. Kung makolekta lang lahat hindi ma-corrupt ang pera, marami tayong pera. Kaya ako nagsabi. That's why I — I resi… You know, I will make it public. I was at the Nayong Pilipino. I gave it to a group of people. Tapos nagpa-bidding sila. Ang nagbidding nila is to allow a gambling casino to be erected there inside the Nayong Pilipino. Kaya ko nagsabi t*** i** ninyo. Anong kahulugan ng Nayong Pilino kung lagyan mo ng sugalan and without a bidding? You know, nandiyan na 'yung mga generals, they are there, chief of staff. Kasi pag galing doon pumunta ako sa command conference. Pagdating ko sa command conference, may ipinasa si Sonny ghost delivery sa AFP hospital. Eh galing pa ako doon sa… When I was facing the military and police, sabi ko, "Look, I thought I had my back covered by you? If I cannot trust you, you better tell me now. Because if you the commanders of the Air Force, Army pati Albayalde and the Navy, I. Will step down now. I am resigning, I'll go back to Davao. You do the explaining to the people why.". Ginanun ko talaga. And in one of the Cabinet meetings ganun rin. There was this two-year, pabalik-balik na 'yung — back and forth, back and forth, for two years it was sitting on their ass, the papers. When they were explaining to me the revised plan and with many requirements, clearances from NBI, I stood up with the Cabinet members, lahat kami. In a Cabinet meeting I said, "Stop. That idiotic matrix is not for me. That is intended for the next — the president after the next." Lumabas ako sabi ko, "Inyo na 'yang gobyerno ninyo.". Sabi ko wala ako… I — I'm tired. I'm tired and I am… Talagang gusto ko na rin mag-resign. Sabi ko I am not happy anymore. Sabi ko anytime — ah the military said, if you want to go out? If you want to take over coup d'etat, go ahead. Do not bring your armors. Do not bring your weapons here. Call me and we'll have coffee. I do not believe. I think Marcos and Estrada were correct that they did not allow the… Kasi 'yung guwardiya mo, guwardiya dito, pareho 'yan. Lahat sila dadaan 'yan sa presidential command. All of them will be assigned. Nag- iikot 'yan sila lahat. A taste of everything. Hanggang Mindanao kaya kilala ko 'yan sila lahat dumaan ng Mindanao eh. Sabi ko talaga, "Inyo na. Ayaw ko na." Sabi ko, "Sige, sinong gusto? Raise your hands. I…" "I…" "Duly appointed member of the junta, will now make the SONA next month.". Ah bahala kayo diyan. You threatened about… If you think that you can run the country better than the elected one, go ahead. That's not my — it's the problem of the Filipino people. Talaga sa Cabinet na — na tsk… Kaya abutan ako ng topak, magbaba dito ako ngayon. Bahala na kayo diyan. I'm going home. One ese — one estimate pegs economic losses at P3.5 billion a day due to traffic congestion in Metro Manila. Meantime, I reiterate my directive, my request, my pleadings to the MMDA and all concerned local officials in Metro Manila, and all other cities, to undertake immediate action to ensure the speedy and smooth flow of vehicular traffic. Reclaim all public roads that are being used for private ends. Marami diyan. And again, I asked Secretary Año to see to it that this is enforced. If there is a mayor or a governor, or kung ano kang — sino kang demonyo ka, i-suspend mo Sir Año. Give him time and if he cannot — if he is not up to it, then pagpahingain mo na lang. Suspend mo na. Wala talagang — wala tayong magawa. They keep on pleasing their own constituents because they are constituents — a leader. Ganun kayo eh. The only way to do it… , me, I have no problem. Me, I am an inutil official. Me, I cannot run anymore. Me, after six years I lose my head. Wala na ako. I… No more challenges in politics. No more mountains to climb. I will do my duty. And of my Cabinet members are military men. You know why? Gusto ninyong malaman? Do not be embarrassed. Atin-atin na lang ito. Huwag mo na silang pansinin, 'yang mga ano diyan. Parang nag meeting- meeting lang tayo dito. 'Yung parang nagpulung-pulong lang. Do not mind them. Eh kung tignan kasi ninyo mahiya kayo. Kasi ganito 'yan, my penchant for military men. I want to ingratiate myself to them? What? I was elected by the people, not by the military, not by the police. But to — why do I have this I said — this predisposed of… Kasi utusan sila madali. Kasi 'pag sinabi mong walang corruption,. Walang corruption. Kaya lang ang military and any organization, 'pag ang top diyan general o ang commander-in-chief corrupt, ku-corrupt 'yan lahat. Pero kung sabihin mo na matino ka, they will follow. Boracay I. Sent Cimatu. Sabi ko, "Puntahan mo nga doon." Is General Cimatu here, si Roy? Ah yeah. Itong si Roy nakilala ko ito sa Mindanao. Hindi ko man 'yan kilala. Mindanao… Na-mayor kasi ako 23 years. All of them passed by Mindanao, kilala ko. 'Pag inutusan mo, kaagad. And they know that I will not. Give illegal orders for them to implement. Alam nila abugado ako. Sabi ko sundin lang ako ninyo. Kaya I was surprised when I ordered Cimatu to go there — to Boracay, Sir Frank. Alam mo ang ginawa niya? The next day lumabas siya roon sa Daily Mirror. Naglalakad siya doon sa beach, naka-t-shirt ng blue at 'yung mata niya nandoon sa dalawang Caucasian na nag… "G****** it, Cimatu. Akala ko ba inutusan kita?" "Yes, sir." "O bakit ka nagpalakad-lakad diyan sa beach tinitignan mo 'yung naka-bikini na dalawang puti?" "Sir, napadaan lang ako sir." Sabi ko, "Trabahuin mo 'yan ha." And they did it in six months' time. Of course with a… I Cimatu because he mixed his pleasure with. Work. That is the way how to do it. I give you until the last week of the year 'yung sa — September na to do this. Clean the LGUs. Walang mangyari dito. We shall continue to invest in the countryside through agricultural programs that will increase the productivity and income of our small farmers and fisherfolk. We shall ensure the full implementation of the Rice Tariffication Law, including the Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund. This will safeguard the livelihood of small farmers through the provisions of modern farm equipment and machineries, seeds and credit, and extension services. I also have not forgotten my commitment to uplift the lives — ito — coconut farmers and further develop the coconut industry until the urgent —. - ah through the urgent utilization of the Coconut Levy Fund. That is 100 million. Kaya ako careful until now wala akong nakuha. Look, it is hard to look for an honest man. I must admit it. Baka ako hindi ko rin kaya. I do not have that … Itong coco fund na ito, ito 'yung naiwan sa — noong kay Marcos na levy fund. This is sacred money. This money was taken out of the pockets of the Filipinos arbitrarily. Wala kang magawa noon eh martial law. Ito na 'yan. Kaya itong coco levy fund, kung sabihin mo lang, tama ang Supreme Court. Hindi mo pwedeng maibigay — sabi mo sino. You can no longer trace the truthful owner of the land. Ang plano ko, kung gusto ninyo, you save the money. You invest the money. Siguro mag-abot 'yan ng mga more than 100 billion. Ilagay na lang ninyo ng ano trust fund for the government. It's about mga 5 billion. Ayon na lang ang gastusin ninyo to reserve the money. Than do it parang sprinkle na ibigay mo sa mga tao. You cannot — sabi ng Supreme Court tama sila —. - you can no longer trace the genealogy of the owners — the original owners. And sometimes it would fail. I will not act on that until I find the money. Wala pa akong nakuha. I have yet — I have yet to look for the money. Hanggang ngayon naghahanap ako. Wala akong makita. Kasi malaki ito and this will — this will, you know, if you assign a corrupt idiot there. Kaya gusto — ang gusto ko o baka nagustuhan rin ninyo, i-deposito ko na lang. Let it remain as a remembrance to the people who lost their ah — at that time. Tapos 'yung 5 billion, 'yon 'yung to improve the econo — the improvement sa replanting sa coconut. Five billion, that's a big money. Pero kung ibigay mo, let it sprinkler, walang mangyayari. 'Yung taga-bigay kukuha 'yan — 'yung pupunta. That's why itong Land Bank na ito, 'pag hindi ito na… You know, you are called Land Bank but you are now the number one commercial bank in the Philippines. What the heck is happening to you? You are supposed to finance agricultural enterprises and endeavors. Bakit wala? Bakit — why can't you buy a few wagons or ? Go to the countryside and ask the people if there are cooperatives, tulungan ninyo to form one. 'Pag wala, eh tignan ninyo na maibigay ninyo for replanting of the coconut — to revive the coconut industry. Pahiramin ninyo ng pera plus the money — 'nung sabi ko of the coconut levy. That is sacred money. Land Bank should go back to land. Why are you mired in many commercial transactions? Bumalik kayo where you were created for and that is to help the farmers. Ilang administration na wala? You better decide on that, I will give you until the end of July to give me a plan or else I will ask Congress to reconfigure you what-not. Wala eh, wala kayong… I'm asking now Congress, 'pag wala sila — if there is no viable plan for that for the farmers and it is all commercial transactions, as abolish it and give the money to the congressmen for their development. Funds. O mas makatulong pa. Diretso eh. Ayaw. Ninyo? O ayaw daw nila, Sir Frank. Huwag mo na lang galawin. I once again urge both Houses of Congress to pass a more responsive version of the bill establishing the Coconut Farmers' Trust Fund to ensure the accelerated utilization of coco levy funds for the -being and empowerment of the coconut farmers. We recognize the urgent need to ensure the sustainability and availability of resources and the development of alternative ones. In this regard, I trust that Secretary Cusi shall fast-track also the development of renewable energy sources, and reduce dependence on the traditional energy sources such as coal. Finally, sustaining our gains entails a national security posture capable of defending the country from external and internal security threats. Defense Secretary Lorenzana, together with the gallant men and women of the armed forces, is at the forefront of this fight. We expect support for legislative initiatives aimed at strengthening defense- related systems such as the proposed National Defense Act, the Unified Military and Uniformed Personnel Separation, Retirement, and Pension Bill, and the revival of the mandatory ROTC in Grades 11 and 12. Important. Alam mo 'pag mag giyera-giyera, 10 out of 10 hindi marunong maghawak ng baril to defend even his father and mother and brothers and sisters. Itong mga bata ngayon, they are bereft of the patriotism and the love of country. Balik sila dito. I think a military training would be good for everybody. Kung hindi sige lang. — sa shabu, mamaya namatay, krrrkkk. "Duterte: Extrajudicial killing. Report to the ICC." Ah . If you can provide me with a good comfortable cell, heated during winter time, I want to go — and an air-conditioned during hot weather. And a conjugal visits, unlimited, para we can understand each other. We are aware of the fact that there are times in AFP and PNP personnel, while in the performance of their duties, get unjustly sued. Providing them with free legal assistance to help and boost their morale. My fellow citizens, to borrow the words of Churchill — akin 'to, this is mine: We are now entering a period of consequences. The consequences of what we did and did not do but should have done during my first half of my term. I assume full responsibility for that. As President, I cannot pass it — the blame to anybody. It's on me. Though we cannot change the past, we will not squander the future. I will push harder in the pursuit of programs that we have started, but always within the parameters of the law. I will not merely coast along or while away my time during the remaining years of my administration. It ain't my style. But I will not stop until I reach the finish line. Then and only then shall I call it a day. Our goal for the next three years is clear: a comfortable life for everybody, all Filipinos. We have made significant strides and accomplished signal milestones as a nation in the past three years. This momentum must continue with greater fervor in the next three years and beyond. I dream of glowing days ahead for every Filipino. I dream of a Philippines better than the one I grew up with. This is my pledge and commitment for three years, if I can. If I cannot, I'm sorry. But I shall continue to comply with my constitutional duty to serve and protect the Filipino, until the last day of my term. God Bless the Filipino. God Bless the Philippines. Thank you ! When I was a member of Congress, I —- my seat was over there. The seat… The lady with a violent — not violent but violet dress — seated. But I was always absent together with the Speaker and Tonyboy Floirendo, who is still absent until today. And that started… Ay nandiyan ba? Sorry. But his propensity started almost 17 years ago when we were members of the 11th Congress. Senate President Aquilino Pimentel III and the members of the Senate; Pantaleon Alvarez, the Speaker and the members of the House of Representatives; Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo; Former Presidents Fidel Ramos, Joseph Estrada, and former President Gloria Arroyo; Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno of the Supreme Court and the members of courts; Archbishop Pinto and the distinguished guests of the diplomatic corps; Secretary Salvador Medialdea and the members of the Cabinet; my fellow workers in government; my countrymen. When I took my oath of office a year or ago, I knew that our country was reeling from a multitude of problems. That day, there was euphoria in the air resulting from a successful campaign and the thought that dominated my being was to make good on my promise to the people to bring — change in government, not a change that is passing but a change that can survive the test of time. Although I still had to know the magnitude and gravity of the problems, my feeling then was that, equipped with political will and braced by a concerned citizenry, those problems would eventually be bested by us. It was only a matter of determination and collective action. It was only a question of time. For as I saw it then as I see it now, there is no problem in the world which can stop the march of a people with unflinching and tenacious determination. That was how euphoric — euphoric it has been. Early on, I felt that if change was to be meaningful, it had to with those occupying the highest positions in government because change that comes from below is more transitory than permanent. And I was aiming for permanence. Let change trickle down from bottom. It has to be a change that is not confined merely to the replacement of people by people, but a change in the people's attitude, disposition and work ethic. Sadly, although we knew years ago that what was needed or ought to do, we did not do because our idea of government was parochial and we could not rise above family, ethnic and. Clan loyalties as as loyalty to friends and co-workers. No one wanted to be a snitch. That is why we are one in saying that genuine change is what this country needs. I believed then, as I believe still, that progress and development will sputter if criminals, illegal drugs, illegal users of drugs are allowed to roam the streets freely, victimizing seeming with impunity, the innocent and the helpless. Worse yet, there were times in the past when the protectors of the people were themselves the perpetrators of the crimes they were tasked to prevent or suppress. It is ironic as it is madness. I have learned that economy surges only when there is peace and order prevailing in places where investors can pour their capital and expertise. I have learned from my experience in Davao City that investor confidence bolstered and fortified only if a potent force and mechanism for protection of local and foreign investments are in place. That is why, I have resolved that no matter how long it takes, the fight against illegal drugs will continue because that is the root cause of evil and suffering that weakens the social fabric and deters foreign investments from pouring in. The fight will be unremitting as it will be unrelenting. Despite international and local pressures, the fight will not stop until those who deal in it understand that they have to cease, they have to stop because the alternatives are either jail or hell. And I will make sure, sure that they will not have the luxury of enjoying the benefits of their greed and madness. I do not intend to loosen the leash in the campaign or lose the fight against illegal drugs. Neither do I intend to preside over the destruction of the Filipino youth by being timid and tentative in my decisions and actions. To the critics against this fight, your efforts will be better spent if you use the influence, moral authority and ascendancy of your organizations over your respective sectors to educate the people on the evils of illegal drugs instead of condemning the authorities and unjustly blaming for every killing that bloodies this country. But don't get me wrong. I value human life the way I value mine. Each life that is snuffed out translates into future generations lost. It is cracking the acorn from which an oak tree grows. - which, in turn, produce the seeds to complete the cycle of perpetuity. There is a jungle out there. There are beasts and vultures preying on the helpless, the innocent the unsuspecting. I will not allow the ruin of the youth, the disintegration of families and the retrogression of communities, forced by criminals whose greed for money is as insatiable as it is devoid of moral purpose. Neither will I be immobilized into inaction by the fear that I will commit an act that will expose me to public condemnation or legal prosecution. You harm the children in whose hands the future of this Republic is entrusted, and I will hound you to the gates of hell. That is why I ask you to join me in this fight against illegal drugs and all forms of criminality. The government, equipped with legal authority, and you, with the moral ascendancy over the sector you represent, can do , and eradicate this social scourge that plagues us no end. Look beyond your biases, your prejudices, your ambition your political agenda. The search for change will and end only when we look into ourselves and find it within. Today, a multitude of problems confront us. No sooner is one problem solved another surges forth in its place. But we will not be disheartened; we will not be cowed; we will not be overwhelmed. It is during trying times and troubled events that the resilience, perseverance and determination of the people are tested. The Filipino is no stranger or neophyte to situations the one we face today. We can, and we will, overcome as we did countless times in the past, only if we work together towards a common goal. Sad to say, despite all efforts, peace, in the Island of Mindanao, continues to elude us. But of course, it is not the peace of the dead but the peace of the living that we seek. Peace flits away a butterfly when you to snatch it by the wings. And our pursuit of peace continues. The red insurgency has been with us for decades; the Muslim issue, for centuries. Time has lapsed, many lives have been lost and destruction has been wrought but peace eludes us still. Sometimes I am almost tempted to conclude that peace not be able to come during our lifetime. But believe me, it will not be for want of trying. And I will persist in our goal of attaining peace to the last day of this administration and even beyond although in a different capacity. There is rebellion in Mindanao. The extremists have declared it their purpose to establish a caliphate within Philippine territory along the teachings and beliefs of Islamic State of Iraq and Syria or otherwise known as ISIS. The battle of Marawi has dealt a terrible blow to our quest for peace now that an alien ideology and a radical shift in purpose have been injected into the local setting. I declared Martial Law in Mindanao because I believed that that was the fastest way to quell the rebellion at the least cost of lives and properties. At the same time, the government would be adequately equipped with the constitutional tool not only to prevent the escape of rebels who can mingle and pretend to be civilian evacuees only to re-group in another place to fight another day, but also to prevent them from spreading their gospel of hate and violence in the rest of Mindanao. Martial Law and the suspension of the Writ of Habeas Corpus enable the military to arrest, detain and question suspected members and sympathizers of the rebellion similar to what happened to the parents of the Maute brothers. As president, I am reiterating my unwavering support and commitment to the soldiers of our Armed Forces and the members of our police force — those who are on the ground and in the battlefields and those who are risking their lives for our country and our democracy. I have your backs. To those who oppose and think that all these efforts are out of order, I hold myself — me and me alone should be responsible. The people of Marawi need help. Caught in the crossfire between government troops and Muslim extremists, they have been through hell and we need to help them rise and move forward. If we cannot provide for the poor and the needy who are many, then we will not be able to keep from harm the rich who are few. At the vanguard of our struggle for peace and order are our Armed Forces and Police. They are the silent heroes who risk their lives everyday for our country's security. In recognition of their valor, we have crafted a program to provide them with comprehensive social assistance, including financial, should they meet harm in the performance of their duty. For the family left behind by those who fell or are rendered disabled in the line of duty, we shall provide shelter, health care assistance, education, and employment. That is my way of telling our troops: never fear, do your duty. I stand behind you. Does this government and all its agencies. To decisively address insurgency and terrorism, we are working doubly hard towards a stronger and more credible national defense system for the country. We continue to strengthen the defense capability of the AFP as a deterrence against terrorists, lawless elements, and other threats. My fellow citizens, what I have said far about the events in Marawi and its neighboring environs is only a part of a looming problem, which will cut across all classes and all sectors of society and eventually affect the entire country from north to south, from east to west, given the fact that Mindanao supplies a great part of our country's food requirements. I refer to climate change, which could bring drought and long dry spells affecting food production in Mindanao, given the fact that Mindanao is unusually warming. I ask all agencies involved in food production to look into this and act accordingly. Also, I am appealing to all our legislators to immediately pass the National Land Use Act or NALUA to ensure the rational and sustainable use of our land and our physical resources, given the competing needs of food security, housing, businesses and environmental conservation. Ours is a rich country. Wealth that this country is endowed with a gift from God to be utilized for the welfare and the common good. I do not believe that this gift was given to us to be merely viewed or appreciated, but to be extracted from the earth and utilized to make life worth living. That is why I say that it is not enough that we mine this wealth. What is more important is that we convert the raw material thereof into finished products for international and local purposes. That way, it will not only be the few who are the rich but also the poor who are many who will benefit therefrom. Therefore, I call on our industrialists, investors commercial barons to put up factories and manufacturing establishments here in the Philippines to process our raw materials into finished products. At this point in my administration, if possible, we shall put a stop to the extraction and exportation of our mineral resources to foreign nations for processing abroad and. Importing them back to the Philippines in the form of consumer goods at prices twice or thrice the value of the original raw materials foreign corporations pay for them. However, in the extraction and utilization of these resources, extreme care must be exercised that we do not recklessly and needlessly harm the environment. Responsible, regulated and sustainable development is what we advocate and require. The protection of the environment must be made a priority ahead of mining and all other activities that adversely affect one way or another. And this policy is non-negotiable. I sternly warn… I am warning all mining operations and contractors to refrain from the unbridled and irresponsible destruction of our watersheds, forests, and aquatic resources. You have gained from mining, we only get about 70 billion a year, but you have considerably neglected your responsibility to protect and preserve — and even the tax, it's about five percent. — environment for posterity. I am holding all mining companies and its officials responsible for the full and quick clean-up, restoration rehabilitation of all areas damaged by mining activities, and the extension of all necessary support to the communities that have suffered mining's disastrous effects on their health, livelihood, and environment, among others. Ganito yan eh. Medyo alis muna ako diyan sa… Sasakit ang mata ko diyan sa y*** na yan. Alam mo, you have the mining. I have to grant you a mining because you have complied with all the requirements of the law. And I cannot… I'd be subject to a mandamus if everything is perfect and you have every to mine. But in doing , you destroy the rivers, you destroy the streams, from which the poor people fish — halwan or mudfish — and that is protein for the day for them. Ngayon makita mo naman not only Gina Lopez gave you a clear picture of what was happening horrendously. Nakita mo kay Ted Failon — yung kay Ted Failon, talagang nanood ako, dalawang beses. And I realized that I have to do something about it as a Filipino. Alam mo, na yung mining. Subsidiary ka lang ng isang another giant corporation or you're a sister company of a telecommunication, hindi kayo magugutom. But look at the picture shown to you. For once, they behaved correctly ang ABS-CBN. Tingnan mo yung pelikula ni Ted Failon. I salute him for coming with it. You see the palayan… Ang palayan tumuyo at ang soil nag-crack. The farmers cannot eat anymore. They are reduced to the garbage of what you can get there, salvage anything and sell it to the scrap. Ganun ang nangyari sa Pilipino. Hindi ko kayo kalaban. As a matter of fact, you give government almost 70 billion. Pero maliit lang yan. Ngayon, nakikita ninyo itong mga palayan na tumutuyo and the rivers wala ng isda. The only source of protein. Hindi ka naman pwedeng mag-hunting. May makita kang eagle diyan, barilin mo, preso ka. Pakainin mo yung… Saan mo ipa…? To go out, sumama tayo — kayo sa akin. And to see how hard it is for them to survive. Now ito ang… Gusto mo ganito ang pangyayari, tutal sobra-sobra naman yang pera ninyo, adre, sa totoo lang. Mayor ako eh, I can look at your corporate earnings, your sister company, I can pierce the corporate identity, kayo rin pala. And even diyan sa mga newspaper. When you are not supposed to… You know, pag newspaper ka you are supposed to be 100 percent. Filipino. And yet when you to pierce their identity, it is pala owned by Americans. Ganun ang nangyari eh. It's a matter of piercing the… Wala masyado ako… ABS, Rappler kayo ba yan? Have you tried to pierce your identity and it will lead you to America? Do you know that? And yet the constitution requires you to be 100 percent — media — Filipino. Rappler, to pierce the identity and you will end up American ownership. Mayaman na kayo, mga mining companies. Ito ang deal ko sa inyo, either I will raise the taxes, ang kumikita niyan i-reserve ko to compensate for those who are suffering and in agony. You have to come up with a substitute, either spend to restore the virginity of their source or I will tax you to death. Kasi yung taxes makuha ko, talagang ibubuhos ko. Ngayon, if you can make an arrangement, an inventory of the — yung nasira — yung mga tao nagutom pati yung river nila wala nang makuha because… You know guys, kayong mga taga-Davao we are not new to it, you want to see horror in your lifetime? Akong bahala. NPA huwag muna kayong magpagara-gara diyan, away-away kay magpunta kami samahan ko sila. You stop your. — puro hambog lang kayo diyan. Punta tayo doon sa Diwalwal, doon sa and I will show you the river. Up there at the source, it's pristine. But doon sa — at the of the boundary where the millings are started, the water there is not clear, it is not brown, it is black. Your one peso will win one million from me if I am lying. Kung gusto mo isama ko kayo bukas doon. Ngayon, pag tinarget tayo ng mga g***** NPA na yan eh problema natin yan lahat. Sabay-sabay na lang tayo. Bakante ang presidency, bakante ang Senado pati ang congressman. Pero totoo yan, you should visit the… Even the first spade, even the first spade full of earth that you extract and throw it away of no use. Itabi mo lang yan diyan eh because it's an open pit, you dig and dig and dig, is already the first spade there is the decreasing of Mother Earth. Alam mo ang isa pang galit sa mining? Si Speaker. He comes from a mining town but he hates mining. Ako naman kasi mga kaibigan ko yung iba, yung mga classmate ko mga vice president ng mining, magpunta sila dito… But it reduces into something — the damage that you have caused. It's not about our friendship. It's not about years of being in the same room. It's not about being fraternity brothers. But it is something that… Ganun yan eh. Alam mo yung martial law, I am not endeavored diyan sabihin ninyo na hindi ninyo ibigay? Lang. Wala akong problema diyan. Maski sabihin ninyo na tama na? Lang. Then I will still fight. The way I will fight the war. If it is not acceptable to the normal of civilian conduct, then I am sorry because I am not fighting a civilian war, I am stopping violence and rebellion. Hindi talaga ako… Ibigay man ninyo o hindi, para sa akin wala. Because ako, I do not intend to go beyond my term. As a matter of fact, mas gusto kong barilin ako doon sa likod. Eh hindi masyado ako itong bilib itong trabahong ito? Akala ko bilib ako. Pagdating ko ah l****, sakit ng ulo. Totoo. Kayo nakikinig kayo. Wala akong pinirmahan ni isa, p**** i**** yan na para pagkain. Pagkain-pagkain sa opisina, eh bayaran ninyo yan. Maglabas ako. I do not collect anything. I do not remember. I do not sign anything there until now. Wala akong allowance wala akong tinatanggap lahat except my salary. Tapos dalawang pamilya pa ang maghati. Anong masama niyan? Sige kayo pakpak diyan. Lahat naman tayo. I can count my… Not even the two hands, one hand lang na exempted sa rule na yan. Dalawa, tatlo, apat, lima. Lokohin ninyo ako, ba't tayo pa ba ang maglokohan? Because this is Congress it has. To be a secret, secret. Maniwala kayong mga ito? Pareho kaming lahat niyan. Ayaw pa tumawa kunwari. I will increase the taxes. Then I will think of something that will compensate or make up for the damage or at least the income restored. Otherwise, I'll have to stop mining. I will ask you to stop it. It's not good. We are a small group of islands, hindi naman marami. The coastal, marami. Yan kasi marami paikot-ikot, but we are in a contiguous territory, maliit lang tayo. You must remember that there are many billions of the future generations waiting in this stratosphere. Ang gusto ninyo para hindi na kayo mandamay, huminto na kayo ng ano. Then let us go to… Because this will not end here. How about the billions and billions and billions of. Filipinos who will come after us? Kawawa naman. They'll have to scratch Mother Earth to eat. By this time kung walang upheaval, no regeneration will occur, we are almost talagang ginaganun natin ang — maliit na lang ang makuha nila. But maawa naman kayo. Makikita mo. Yung apo mo kung ganun mo na lang… Kung ganun mo na lang yung — embrace mo yung apo mo sa pangalawang asawa. Yung isa ganun rin. Di ba? Di ba, sir? Suntukin kita diyan ngayon, liar ka. Finally, let me make this appeal to those directly engaged in mining. Declare your correct income pay your correct taxes. Believe me, your failure to do will be your undoing and eventual ruin. Hindi na ako makatakbo, matanda na ako. I don't think I'll even survive the five years. Pero pagka sinabi ko upakan kita, upakan talaga kita. To our employees and officials of the LGUs tasked with monitoring these mining operations within their territorial jurisdictions, do your job without fear or favor. I you responsible for any misdeed or failure the mining entities to comply — do not comply or comply with the guidelines, rules and regulations governing mining operations and activities within your area of responsibility. I mean it. Do not to test my resolve. I have nothing to lose except my life. While we can control the acts of man, no one can control stop the fury and rampage of weather gone wild. When nature fights back, it does with a vengeance. We have seen the terrible toll that Super typhoon Yolanda and the succeeding typhoons exacted in terms of human life and property. And we still have to recover from the beating that we got both during and in the aftermath of those mega-typhoons. Aside from droughts, tempests and other problems taking shape which, according to DOST- PHIVOLCS — it is no longer a distant possibility but a probability: Earthquakes. The series of damaging quakes in Leyte, Surigao and nearby provinces and islands attest to this. We were told that it is no longer a question of -if? But a matter of -when.? Thus, we need to act decisively and fast because the threat is huge, and imminent. Come to think of it , they say that there is no perfect instrument or human acumen can predict earthquake. I hope it will not come. Kasi kung magdating yung sabi nila yung -Big One?, I hope it will be in the mountains and in the rural areas. Because if it's — sabihin. Nila tinatakot nila ang… Media kasi… Nandito eh in the speech, I reviewed it last night. I am calling both houses of Congress to expeditiously craft a law establishing a new authority or department that is responsive to the prevailing 21st century conditions and empowered to best deliver enhanced disaster resiliency and quick disaster response. While the law is crafted with extreme urgency, we need to undertake immediate action to ensure disaster resiliency and effective response in the greater Manila area, which is our country's seat of governance, center of business, commerce, and the academe. Disaster resiliency of Metro Manila and the surrounding provinces is a matter of urgent concern. Iyon nandito yan, tinatakot nila dito because of the high-rise buildings and… Ilang tao ang nakatira diyan? Kung… Kaya kaya ito sa isang sinkhole? I mean if it cracks and it goes down, can we still manage to go up? God, huwag ngayon ha kay nandito ako. Hintayin mo lang yan sila na lang sila dito nag-aaway. I am directing the Cabinet Cluster on Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management to immediately work hand in hand with the concerned LGUs, the private sector and the affected communities themselves, in undertaking disaster measures, antidotes. We all need to act fast. With all the foregoing said, what then is the state of the nation today? I will mince no words and neither will I window-dress the situation we are in. Let me answer in two brief sentences. We are in — for trouble — because we live in troubled and uncertain times. And I fear that get worse before they become better. But I said I hope we will cope, we hope and pray. The West Philippine Sea issue and Federalism are matters that we have to tackle sooner or later. On the other hand, despite our recent gains in improving the peace and order situation in the country, there is still to be desired and if we are to eradicate the menace of illegal drugs, criminality and corruption, we must do it. I therefore ask Congress to act on all pending legislations to reimpose the death penalty on heinous crimes - on the trafficking of illegal drugs. There is a shortage… No, no, no. There is a short clip of CNN about people in Massachusetts, was it there? Iyong clip nila ang ipinakita. Tiningnan… Pakitingin lang… It's repeated for almost every week yata yang mga short clips. Tingnan mo yung mga tao doon na hinayaan nilang mag… They are there, they live under the bridge, they are getting thin, they are doing nothing. Nakaganun lang sila tapos po-pose ng ano… And they are aplenty there. They do not work, wala. Tapos sabi ng UN… Is he here? Are you there iyong UN representative? Na sinabi mo na shabu will not affect the brain? Are you here? Raise your hand, if you're here. Do not worry. I will … Do not — the word -delude? As into you… Iyong mga ano ninyo na — but we. Know everyday that one family raped, dalawa and all are dead. Then you trivialize it with human rights and due process. Ako niyan. When you go into an anger, when you burst with rage, yan. But with many killings as brutal and as cruel as what happened, if you add human rights and due process, you stink and your mouth smells. If you want to criticize, criticize, condemn the act, stop there. But do not give the excuse or do not make it trivial by saying human rights at least we'll be protected… Iyan ang pinakab***** na magawa ng isang tao. When you criticize, stick on one topic. Then you find an event where you can talk about human rights and due process, but do not talk about it in the same time when there is a carnage and you to blabber, talk about human rights. Lalong nagagalit ang tao. Eh p****** i** mo. May namatay na diyan, akala mo kung sino ka. What have you done in the name of human rights? Seventy-seven — you have the records. You can summon the police. Seventy- seven before I became president. All drug- related, 77,000. And you trivialize that with a conference… At tsaka pumunta dito ang tatanungin yung nasa presuhan na pinireso dahil nag-imagine… I challenge you, you want a debate in public? , we'll have it. I will challenge you how also you trivialize the thing by — yung binibigyan niyo ng importansiya si De Lima. You all know, you were all here. You conducted the investigation. You heard the witnesses. You saw the videos. Is she a credible woman? Can she be a moral person? Puro kayo drama diyan sa… When you talk about an incident, talk about it, then condemn, condemn the police. But do not connect it with due process and human rights. Mag-mukha kang g*** sa harap ng Pilipino. You know why I get this rating? I could not be brighter than you and my work is not more important or your vocation is not less than mine. But when you talk in public carry the proper message. Kaya mag-82 kayo or kaya binobombahan niyo kasi ako ng ganun. Sasabihin naman ng mga tao, -Eh tama yan. Tama yan si Duterte.? Kasi nangyayari eh. Eh kayo man ang front sa pa- ganun-ganun, eh pag may namatay diyan na maraming massacre, ni-rape mga babae, bata, hindi kayo umiimik. Maya-maya pagdating ng mga — pagdating nitong mga Western expert kuno, you give them premium and importance. Saan ba ang utak ninyo? Bakit kayo bilib diyan sa puti? Tingnan mo ang puti, panahon ni Obama, una yung spokesman ng State Department. Akala mo kung sino. Akala nila mas bright pa sila sa akin. Then the staff of the President, then Obama. -I would to remind Mr. Duterte that the policy of…? Eh di yari ako. Pagdating ni Trump, -Oh yes, Mr. President, I've been expecting your call. You are doing it all … And this G*******…? Uwi na ako. T**** i*** yan. ? That's the value of the country that you value. Ambivalent. Parang electric fan. Dito o hindi na , it's vacillating. Tapos kayong mga — bilib kayo. Hindi ko talaga maintindihan ang Pilipino. It takes for an American to say that I'm a son of a b****. And it takes for an American to say, -Oh you're great. You're a hero in your country.? O saan ako pumunta dito ngayon? It is time for us to fulfill our mandate to protect our people from these crimes that have victimized… You know, huwag ninyo akong takot-takutin niyang preso yung international court of justice. S***, I am willing to go to prison for the rest of my life. Ang importante sa akin ginagaw ko yung gusto ko. Alam mo kasi in this country it is a rule of majority. I did it for the 50 plus one because in a vote of 100, I get 51, 50 plus one. Fifty is one-half, one, that is majority of one, I win. Yung 49, yon. Yung mga… I do not have to make them happy. But when the time comes, eh kung malasin. Ako, pupunta ako sa presuhan, do not worry about me. I can take it. Noong maliit pa ako, labas- pasok ako sa… Wala pa yang law ni Pangilinan. Labas-pasok na ako sa presuhan. Kunin ninyo. Yung record sa pulis doon sa Davao. Takutin na, -He will be prosecuted.? Hoy, abogado ako because I will… Sabi ko nga, everybody is entitled to come here and question me, but I have to question you also. At para magaling, let us make it official. We go to court and we tell the judge that we are hearing by an international body, can we have it judicially recorded? And I will place them under oath. Mahuli ko man talaga yan sila. May pinatay ako, tama yan. When I was mayor, a little over… For 23 years ako mayor ng Davao eh. Makita mo ang Davao ngayon, you have been LGUs before. What city is now hitting nine growth percent? Eh nandoon pa kami sa Mindanao, binobomba pa kami sa Davao. Davao is nine growth. Tapos sabihin ninyo… Ngayon, paano ngayon i-nine mo yung — palabas mo itong nine we are about to hit six or , sabi nila. Pero. Pag hayaan mo lang ako, mag-abot ito ng 21, the highest in the world. Kayo lang ang taga-pigil eh. It is time for us to fulfill our mandate to protect… Tapos na yan. Kindly… For long… We have to act decisively on this contentious issue. Capital punishment is not only about deterrence. It is also about retribution. Make no mistake about that. Iba kasi ako eh. Let us understand each other including the international community. Ang aming. — our criminal system uses the Revised Penal Code. That is a law that was given to us by the Spaniards, the original Revised Penal Code. Though it was translated into English and in this two books, three books, there are the definition of crimes and the penalties and everything. And the thrust of that Revised Penal Code, ladies and gentlemen, is the essence of retribution. That is why you have penalties. There is also the word -positivist theory? That you can nurture a criminal into goodness provided he goes to prison for two years, three years, he's released, he's a sex offender. When he goes out, he rapes again, kidnaps another girl and makes her a hostage for many years. Ganun kayo eh. Admit it, ganun kayo. You are lenient about this son of a b****, a human being that has a virulent brain and his enemy is society. And many at times, there were sex offenders in America released only to rape and kidnap again and kill in a few months after release. In the Philippines, it is an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. You took a life then you must pay for life. That is the only way to even. You cannot place a premium on the human mind that he will go straight. Nobody can. Not even your best scientist. No one has ever fathomed how a person would react in committing crimes. That's the only way to do it to instill fear, that if you do it, you will die. That's the advantage of criminals and rebels and terrorists because they think that you are afraid to die. That's why when I went to Marawi, I was asked by the media, -Why are you here?? -I am here because my soldiers are here and I came here to die also.? Because any battle, any fierce encounter, you have to be of equal equanimity. Gusto siyang mamatay, eh di gusto ko ring mamatay. They say that they use the name of God, and the Christians say, -we have the same thing.? I read the Ecclesiastes 3. What does it say? Even during elections, there is a time to be great and a time for defeat. A time to be in the skies, emblazoned there and a time to be somebody. A time to have money, a time to be hard up. A time to walk many kilometers. To school and a time for graduation and being a lawyer. A time to be… I don't know what I am now. There's always a time. Ganun yan eh. I'll match you. Pag sinabi mong, -Gusto kong mamatay.? Anak ka ng… Dalawa tayo. This bully, you know I had dinner with them sa Bayan. Itong NDF because I used to be friends with the NDF. I was crossing the ideological borders before. Ako yung nakakapasok sa teritoryo and we were friends. But times have changed because God placed me here and I take care of a Republic. Sabi nila doon -bully? Daw ako. T******* pala kayo, talagang bully ako. P***** i**. Talagang bully ako to the enemies of the state, talagang bully ako. Ito pa, sabi ko sa mga sundalo, yung mga human rights na ano, you are flying everywhere, anywhere yung mga utak ninyo. I said, -Take no prisoners.? Which is — kill them?. Which is correct? But you don't listen to my speech. This media — lalo na itong ABS — kunin lang yang, kill them.? Yan ang problema ninyo kaya minura ko kayo. Walang Presidente na p*******i** kayo because you are not behaving. Now you're asking me for talks… When you publish in the newspaper or quote us in media, itong mga reporters would only quote kill them.? I said, Kill them in a fight. If you have to shoot them, shoot them at the heart or the head.? Sabi ko. Why? Because they will be detained here in Marawi, wala tayong presuhan. Ngayon, and the courts will always insist that they will be — that's the law — that they will be tried and detained in the place where they committed the crime. Kaya huwag kayong mag — patayin talaga ninyo, kasi ilagay natin yan diyan sa barracks natin diyan, sa ating Mechanized Division. Pag-eskapo niyan, dalhin yung kanyon natin, ipaputok pa sa atin. Marami. How many jail — — jailbreaks in Mindanao, in Cotabato alone? Six. Cotabato City, four. Ang jail doon, nire-raid tapos pinapalabas. Alam ba ninyo yan? Because you do not publish. Or itong mga taga-Maynila… Hindi kayo, mga bright kayo, bilib ako. Mga g****g****. Sabi na -Why do you…?? Why? What happened last April in Davao? It was bombed. How many were killed? Twenty-seven. Few years ago, the church was bombed twice. How many died? Fifty-nine. The airport as the people were coming out of the departure — ah arrival — it was bombed. How many died? Thirty-two. In the war, three nuns were lining up there. I had to scoop the brain of the nun to put it in a can because the face was shattered. Zamboanga. And you say that the violation is only in Marawi? Torpe. Talaga kayong… Mag-usap tayo ngayon. Dalhin ko kayo doon sa mga biyuda. Kailan lang yun? Huwag niyong sabihin na -It's only in Marawi.? Rebellion has been going on in Mindanao. Walang sinasanto doon. Hindi lang ninyo binabasa nang husto. What's the… It's porous. Kung separate islands yan, . Kung separate yan — porous, they can go… And Mindanao — this is not to… The Moro has nothing to do with it, pareho tayo. Pareho tayong Maranao, shut up. Huwag kayong ma… Ito ang totoo. Maraming Muslim sa Mindanao. Lahat… Eh sa Abra, meron eh. In this fight… , where do you think the Moro would side? Kung patayan na. They will side with government? Kung ako ngayon, kung nakatira ako, hindi kami umalis ng — hindi ako dinala ng nanay ko sa labas. I'll be a resident of Marawi, what do you think will be my sentiment? Sulu. Davao, puro Muslim enclaves yan, there are enclaves, parang baryo-baryo. Kapag sentimiyento ang putukan, magputok yan sabay-sabay. On another thing, I'll talk it about in the conference. Sumobra itong Left eh. Maggawa ka ng bahay — nakawin. Ang sabi ko sa sundalo, -Do not force the issue. I will build yours. Ibigay mo na lang.? May project ngayon, gusto na naman nilang kuhanin. Do not commit that mistake. Here and now, I will tell you, including the Congress of the Republic of the Philippines: You do anarchy, I will order the soldiers and the police to shoot. Even if I have to bury thousand of Filipinos. Huwag ninyo akong ganunin. Either you're… Either… Let us understand this beginning today, either we have laws in this country or we do not. We enforce the laws against the miners and the rich, but I will also enforce laws against anarchy, disturbance, and create trouble. Kayo rin, natatakot din eh. Takutin ninyo ako na occupy the streets? Anak ng jueteng. You stay there, you ask for two days, I will give you six months. Huwag kayong umalis diyan. Kainin ninyo pati yung dumi ninyo diyan. Takut-takutin mo ang gobyerno. I'm sorry I've exceeded my time, but… Eh kailangan kong sabihin eh. Para maintindihan din nila. Tutal nandito na lang rin ako sa media. Nakikinig pati lahat. Kayong mga Left, I will not talk to you. Why should I? Huwag mo na akong pilitin na magpatayo kayo mga pro-poor, shut up. Wait for two years, because I have… You know, this is my proposal. I may be wrong and I will accept it, but this is mine. From now on, I will save money for the Armed Forces of the Philippines. We have lost soldiers. And there are thousands already incapacitated to fight. Pati yung police ko, araw-araw ninyong ina-ambush. Pati ang convoy ko, kasi doon ako mag-sakay, in-aambush nila. Pati akong — g***. P*****i**, pati ako, patayin nila. Sabagay, malayo ako doon. Pero convoy ko kasi yun eh. Waiting lang ako doon sa ano… Alam mo ginamitan niyo ng machine gun. Kaya lang armorized. Kayong mga congressman, senador na ayaw ninyong — baka may kalaban kayo. Asawa ba ninyo yung katira ninyo ngayon? O inagaw ninyo? Pa-armorize ninyo. Totoo. Proven, M60. Si… Si Senator Drilon, M60, sir. Hindi talaga to maalis. Kasi binara na nila. Nasira na lang yung — di talaga nila. And the soldiers inside were all there all the time, mina- machine gun na, hindi tatalab. Mga g***, pati yung convoy ko, ambushin. Hindi nila alam na nakasibat na ako. Kaya gusto niyo kong mag-usap tayo, no, sumobra kayo. Ikaw, Sison, tang … Mag-inom ka ng Tang. Yung orange. Matanda ka na. Kayong Pilipinas, makinig, buong Pilipinas. Kayong mga bata, kayong mga Lumad natives, itong matatanda na ito, Sison is sick. May colon cancer. Ang gastos ng Norway, sumurender na siya. Kasi naging isyu sa pulitika eh. This government who sponsored those — who provided the good offices. Matatalo sa eleksyon dahil sa issue diyan. Kasi pabalik-balik ang mga b****, kala mo mga turista. Wala namang pinag-uusapan. Pagdating dito, gusto ng ganito, gusto ng ganyan, ah l*** mo. Huwag mong sabihin. Yung meaning doon sa mga bisita. Napura na ako ba. Talagang ano ako, sir. Masyadong demanding, ni hindi naman kayo nanalo ng elections ni minsan. You cannot even hang on into a. Barangay. And you keep on killing people, hindi lang yung mga pulis, pati yung mga civilians na ayaw magsali sa kanila. Kaya sabi ko ano — sabi ko talaga, -buang ka.? And sinabi ko talaga. Pardon pa si…. Pi****** i** ko talaga siya the other day sa Davao. Sinong tinatakot ninyo? Katanda-tanda na ninyo eh. At lahat tayo mamatay. Kayong mga naiwan diyan sa kalsada, mabuti pa umuwi kayo. Wala kayong makuha diyan sa komunista. Do you think that if the ISIS prevails in this country that you will have a place in their society? You must be awfully stupid, as stupid. Wala kayong makuha. Lahat tayo damay. Thank you for allowing the exhaust dito. In our sustained effort to achieve and lasting peace … Class, be courteous. Do not make a noise. The visitors are listening. And lasting peace for a nation, we are pursuing an inclusive peace process, promoting the participation of all stakeholders, including those conflict-affected areas. We took steps to promote inclusiveness in the Bangsamoro Transition Commission (BTC) by expanding its membership through Executive Order Number 8 which I signed in November last year. By giving representation to indigenous peoples, women, children, and sultanates, and key stakeholders in the drafting of the Bangsa Basic Law, we ensure a Bangsamoro government that reflects the aspirations of our Muslim brothers and sisters as as our indigenous brethren. We have embarked on various initiatives to advance our national interest in the global community. We pursue good relations with all nations anchored on an independent — on an independent foreign policy — and the basic tenets of sovereign equality, mutual respect and non-interference. As an independent nation, we will uphold and promote our national interests in the international community. We will strengthen and seek partnership with those who share our values. We will engage nations with full respect for the rule of law, sovereign equality, and again, non- interference. These are the principles that we are upholding as we advance to this year for the meeting as the Chair of the ASEAN. We have cultivated warmer relations with China through bilateral dialogues and other mechanisms, leading to easing of tensions between the two countries and improved negotiating environment on the West Philippine Sea. At this point, allow me to take a step back in time, in 1901. In 1901, there was known as Balangiga, and that is Eastern Samar. It was the time for Philippine-American War. A combined group of Filipino villagers and guerrillas, in an effort to defend Samar Island from the alien invaders, attacked and overwhelmed a U.S. — a United States infantry garrison. Forty- eight American officers and men were slain in the attack. On the Filipino side, the casualty count was twenty-eight killed and twenty-two wounded. In retaliation, U.S. gunboats and patrols were sent to Balangiga, Samar with the order to. -…make a desert of Balangiga? And to reduce Samar Island into an island of -howling wilderness,? Where every male citizen from the age of ten and above, and capable of bearing arms, would be put to death. The Church bells of Balangiga were seized by the Americans as spoils of war. Those bells are reminders of the gallantry and heroism of our forebears who resisted the American colonizers and sacrificed their lives in the process. Krag against bolo — krag was the standard rifle issued to the American troops. And that is how the historians describe. Mahirap talag kung director ka, ikaw pa ang speech. Many historians describe — the Philippine-American war. That is why I say today; give us back those Balangiga bells. They are ours. They belong to the Philippines. They are part of our national heritage. Isauli naman ninyo. Masakit yun sa amin. We now talk about our Overseas Filipinos. They are our heroes. They and their families have sacrificed to the — for the country. We all know how a large part of our economic — economy comes from their remittances. That is why to ensure that their rights are protected, I ordered the increase of our assistance to the OFW from 400 million pesos to more than 1 billion. We have been hard at work in securing the rights and welfare of our OFWs. A year ago, I also warned government officials and employees that I will never tolerate corruption in my administration, not even a whiff of it. Let the dismissal of several high-ranking officials — whom I myself appointed — serve as a warning to all that I will never back down on my commitment to cleanse this government and corporation. In order to bring government services closer to the people, we established hotlines government centers that receive public concerns, one of which is the Hotline 911, which allowed us to receive and immediately respond to emergencies. We also launched Hot — launched Hotline 8888, the Citizen's Complaint Hotline. This is a public hotline facility that receives feedbacks or concerns on government services. Since we launched this hotline, we have received numerous complaints from the public on government — slow government processing, unclear or changing procedures and requirements, centralized issuances of clearances and permits in Metro Manila and discourteous government employees, among others. Ganito yan. Time and again, yung — yung pag-transact ng ordinaryo — no, the ordinary people who contract business in government. In the last ASEAN Ministerial Conference, I don't know why Malacañang has to — my office has to do some work for — or the others, itong mga barong. It's always the — that outfit takes care of the attires that will be given to the ministerials, this time, to the heads of state. Alam mo, I'd to address this myself to government. Iyan bang bayaran, pabalik-balikin ninyo ang tao. Alam… I know that because I've been mayor for 23 years, I never allowed it in my city. But dito, alam mo yang mga sastre diyan sa Parañaque hanggang Cavite — yung mga tailoring diyan — ang negosyo lang niyan involve boy scout, teachers' uniform, girl scouts, naghahabol yan sila ng mga kontrata. And they are the — the stores that you find along the way until Cavite. They group together during times of ganito, may ASEAN. And they look for a person to represent them. This is not — no offense intended but — , they look for beautiful women, young, who would do the talking, arrangement. You know, because it's the… , it's the reality of life, that the beautiful women get the attention always. Tapos, pag na-deliver na nila, nasukatan na, pabalik-balikin ninyo. And there in Malacañan, it happened. , I will fire the lady, was connected with her, as I have fired everybody else. A Cabinet member for buying an 18-million truck in Austria. That was not our contract. It was a contract of the previous administration. Fourteen of those 18 million were already delivered. This Cabinet member was… I was informed about and I said the legal — his legal office — to stop it. You know what? He went ahead, traveled there, signed something for the — another tranche of delivery. There at the meeting — in the Cabinet meeting I said,. -Were you able to read the opinion of your law — your own law office?? He said, -No.? But Sonny Dominguez was already passing to me the — yung sa iPhone. I was reading it while I was talking to him. Sabi ko, -P***** i** mo, you're fired. You're lying.? And I fired him, -Go out of this office. I do not want to see your face again.? Ganon ako ka-istrikto. Yung — the Cabinet members — and they are here — they're only given, noon, one year, two years — one month. The directors, makinig kayo sa gobyerno, bantay kayo. Directors, you're only given 15 days. And I do not want directors out of their office, you eat your lunch there, lahat kayong taga-gobyerno, that you can resume to work immediately. Now, ito ang deal ko sa public. There is the 8888. I cannot stop corruption and wrongdoings if you do not cooperate. You text me. Libre yan — 8888. You name the public official, name his sins in that bulletin, and I will take it from there. Do not be afraid about libel, I will take care of that. Iyon ang gawain ninyo. I have to have your help. Kung hindi kasi kayo mag-ano, wala eh. Lahat. Pulis, military, lahat, pati ako. If you think that some of — may nagawa ako na masama, sabihin ninyo. Do not be afraid. We are all workers of government, kayo yung employer namin. We get the money from your pocket to our pockets. Kami — kailan pa… Since when have you heard me talk about government and officials? I always address everybody, -workers of government.? I seldom mention -Malacañan Palace?. It is not a palace, it is a house of wood, why should I call it a palace? Something the European-style. I call it office. Palace, palace ka diyan eh. And besides, all the rats of Pasig are there. It's beside Pasig River. Yung lahat ng mga daga diyan kung saan-saan, doon nagla- landing. It has a wild field, and they are not killed because they are Presidential mouse. Iyon ang sabi ng — iyan o sundalo. -Sir, di daw ipagbaril kay Presidential mouse.? P***** i**, mabuti pa ang mouse dito kay hindi pa pinapatay, yung tao kinakatay ninyo. The people's patience is wearing thin, is mine. I am reiterating my directive to all government agencies frontline services to our people — from womb to tomb — to further streamline their respective services to make these efficient and people-friendly. We want to ensure that our people receive the quality services that they deserve minus the delays by the bureaucratic red tape. I expect speedy reforms along this line. We'll rightsize the national government. Let us trim the excess fat and add more muscle through the expeditious passage of -The Act Rightsizing the National Government to Improve Public Service Institute.? I therefore urge Congress to pass this at the soonest. For the Government Owned and Controlled Corporations — isa pa kayo — the implementation of the existing Salary Standardization Law pending review in the Compensation and Position Classification System. Excessive, extravagant, and unconscionable salaries and allowances, incentives, benefits and bonuses across the Government Owned or Controlled Corporations at this time, in crisis. You'll have to pass by my office and I am not inclined to increase your allowances, bonuses, and salaries at this time. Wala yan. You cannot do it on your own. You have to direct it to the Executive Secretary. And I'll tell you, I am not inclined to give increases now. Seven years from now, when Drilon makes it to the presidency. I also appeal to the Supreme Court to consider the national interest and our development goals before issuing TROs and injunctions on critical government projects and cases involving government assets. I am a co-worker also, ladies and gentlemen. May I be allowed to be also as frank? Tutal wala naman akong ina-ano, eh. I do not need to offend you. But I cite, for example, the Supreme Court TRO that prevents the Department of Health from distributing subdermal implants, which caused a wastage of P350-million worth of taxpayers' money. I also note that since its issuance two years ago, this TRO has impaired the government's ability to implement responsible planning — family planning methods in the RH Law. It is time that we put an end to the practice of some parties of resorting to technicalities in our laws to prevent the government from fulfilling its mandate. Ganito yan, ma'am, eh. Tutal, this is as good as any other time to talk to you. And may I be understood by you — I am sorry to say this, , I am — I do not intend to do it. But if we have. To talk about government and our sins, which I am not an exception, all our — you know — delays, lahat naman tayo nagkakamali. Ganito yan, two . Wala na talaga akong panahon. I'll stay… I don't know if I can make another SONA again in the future. It's — it's not for me to tell. Itong TRO has been the bane of projects. And even Consunji, yang mga Ayala, nag-aaway. Yan. To make you understand na hindi lang kayo. Tapos, yang TRO na yan would delay the projects. Now God — and I'm asking Congress, find me a law na kung may bidding naman at it was regular, dapat ang korte or somebody else should not be messing it up. Because it can delay the projects, which has been the case in the provinces. Alam mo, mag-file. Yan ng kaso — either it is the truth and the COA will find out or makihati siya — -I will withdraw the case and dissolve the TRO of course. But give me a few — 10 percent.? Ganun ang ugali ng Pilipino. Kaya yang TRO na yan is the bane of our efficiency, and I do not know whether… I will not attribute anything, ma'am, sa Supreme Court. I am at fault I am sorry if I misquote or I did not have the complete facts. But itong Congress na ito passed the Reproduction Law. It was already a law na dapat i-implement because we are going into a family planning. I am not for abortion. I am not for birth control. But , I am for the giving of the freedom to a Filipino family the size ng pamilya niya. How many children would he be able to support and send to school? Ang nangyari nitong TRO , sir, ma'am, may nag-file doon sa inyo — Supreme Court — tapos nag-issue kayo ng TRO two years ago. In the meantime, yung — ang gobyerno, nagbili ng medisina — ito subdermal pati itong mga pills worth 360. It was not a reckless purchase. It was in preparation for the implementation of the law. Hindi naman akalain na mag-TRO and it has been two years. The medicines will expire next month. I told Ubial, the Health Secretary, to find out if there is a nation who — which would allow it and i-donate na lang than go to waste. Iyan ho ang nangyari. I do not blame you. You have been busy or something. Wala. Ako, I m … I am below you, . Pero sinasabi ko lang. May isa pa. Huwag na lang itong speech, walang kwenta, walang makukuha diyan. The bane — isa pa itong — the Congress and tayo sa gobyerno, including the judges and justices, should understand that by this time, yung lowest bid, yun ang nagpo-promote ng graft and corruption sa ating bayan. COA, you are here. Malaman na lang ninyo na may violation ako. Doon sa military, I do not allow them to bid and to buy the weapons from everywhere, because almost all countries are making arms. Tawag nila, small arms industry. We're fighting a rebellion. True, we do not need the armaments. But diyan sa Marawi, you have to hit hard because they are prepositioned inside buildings. And until now, we cannot proceed fast because there are 300 hostages. Sabi ko, -Do not assault. If necessary, we'll have to wait. Wait it out.? But we have to give food. You do not — I do not care if they are Moro or Christians. It's not… We do not have that luxury. Kasi pag — there is a distinct possibility that we attack, they will behead everybody. , find a way to do it. If you cannot find a way to do it then I said, -Wait it out.? Sila ang nakatagal. Baka sabihin hindi marunong itong sundalo. Ako yung pipigil. Initially, sabi ko bomba. -Eh, sir, hindi talaga madala, sir.? Every window is occupied, yung high-rise. And we were losing because of the snipers. And in there, they hurry, I said, -Slow down.? When I was — hindi ako nagyayabang — when I was in the camp sa Ranao, while I was briefing — I was being briefed by the military and was giving the instructions, I heard about 16 pumutok at tsaka yung bala na, -Weng, weng, weng!? Iyong mga reporter nandoon sa likod ng stage kasi semento yun eh. We will ano… Sabi ko, -If this is how we should wait, then we'll wait. Unless you can find a solution — somebody here who has a good, even a horse sense to negotiate for the release of…? Ayan itong isa. Babalik ko yung lowest bid. Alam mo ganun yan adre eh. Ang magbabagsak ng lowest bid, yung walang pera. Ang magbabagsak ng lowest bid, sasabihin niya doon sa ano,. -Magbibigay po ako sa inyo.? Kung sinu-sino yang mga opisyal. , lowest bid papanaluhin siya. , with no capital, bibigay siya ng pera. Tapos ibigay, lahat bigyan niya, connected — lahat. Pagkatapos niyan, if it is a 100-million project, he has to pay many guys, ang naiwan niya 100 — out of the 100, 40 million lang, that is the cost of the project. , when I was campaigning for the Presidency, I was all over the Philippines. My God, I could see a — the appropriation, pero ang airport nila, three meters long. Ginawa na lang basketball court. And there is a province here. Hindi kayo, not you. If you look into the records back in time na puro na complex ang roads diyan. Talagang daan dito, daan doon. Pero pag pumunta ka, isang daan lang. It's only one highway. That is how corruption destroys the nation. Ngayon, last. I have to say this. Kailangan ko siya sabihin, sir, eh. I was elected June 30, nag- oath ako. , July nagpunta na ako sa Davao — sa AFP Medical Center. Nakwento ko na ba ito sa inyo, hindi pa? Tapos sabi ko — it's familiar, kasi I signed a letter nung mayor ako. Sabi ko, -May MR(I) ba kayo?? Sabi nila, -Wala, sir.? Sabi ko, -May state-of-the-art ba kayo na X- ray?? Sabi, -Wala, sir.? Sabi ko, -May hyperbaric ba kayo?? That's the chamber where you are placed inside if you suffer the bends, yung nagdi-deep dive ka. But it is also high-pressured that can arrest gangrene, those who are extracted from the field of battle about two days na, gangrene sets in. , they are placed there. And it can work miracles for a wounded soldier. , in one upuan, in one sitting, you did this… Then, I saw the building and I went inside. Iyong drainage nila, bumabalik. I said, -You know, I am surprised. You're military men, why would you allow that kind of…? The dirt is going back to… How do you expect the sailors to — the soldiers to get ? Tapos, that's the only building. The old — the oldest. I said, -, you rehabilitate it. I'll give you a new one in the meantime.? But last month I went to the back of my office, doon sa barracks ng Presidential guards. , we were groundbreaking for the hospitals of the soldiers. And I asked the soldiers who were there also from V. Luna, -Are you now using the equipment?? Alam mo ang sinagot sa akin, -Sir, tayo-tayo na lang ang mag-usap huwag na yan sila. T**** i**, wala pa. Hindi pa na-deliver.? Sus. Sinabi ko, -If this is the way how you treat our soldiers and they are dying now and that machine was ordered a year ago, and then a coup d'état, a mutiny is not a surprise to me.? Kaya sabi ko kay Ubial, hindi niya kasalanan it's because of the procurement. Pero ganun… Is Secretary Ubial here? Are you here Secretary? Change the procedure because I will change you. Talagang mag-coup d'état yan. Marami ng… We are losing about… By this time meron, every -. — everyday we lose about 10? Everyday. Sometimes I say it's a useless war. There is a rebellion. Sabi ko maski kung ako ang sundalo niyo and there is a machine already ordered it could have save my leg, tapos wala ma'am, ay p**** i**, mag-coup d'état ako. And let us get the machine by ourselves. I will not be surprised if it's already in their minds. Ako, I am only be willing to step down. But as a long-term solution, I urge Congress to thoroughly review our existing procurement laws and come up with legislation that will ensure the prompt delivery of quality goods and services to the people, medicines and hospital equipment. Kasi itong military ang sabi ko do not mind COA about I will answer for that. Since COA is here I limit it to three places where the military can buy the equipment. Because I'm sure that we will work and they can kill the enemies and make even our forces stronger or in parity with what they have on the other side. Itong armas sabi ko huwag mong sundin yan. I will explain to COA why. Huwag mo akong pabibilhin diyan sa mga lugar ng South America at lahat diyan sa mid-European Eastern. European countries are also… There are good ones but I limited them to. Equipment in listening kasi kung magbili ka doon sa iba, nakikinig rin sila, sabay na kayo. Tatlo na kayong nagko-communicate. Tawag sa Bisaya, -brin.? Our laws should support, and not impede, national development in a speedy and sustainable manner. In our bid to accelerate human capital development, we seek to ensure lifelong opportunities by enhancing the quality of and access to education and training programs. We have sustained investments in higher education and committed to the full implementation of the K to 12 Basic Education Program. We have widened the reach of skills training and increased the number of out-of-school children and youth who have availed of the Alternative Learning System. To ensure that Filipinos are given equitable access to quality and affordable health services, we expanded health insurance coverage and benefits. The destitute and the indigents, or those who could not afford hospitalization, can now be provided with free services by government- operated, public hospitals as we have strengthened the implementation of the No Balance Billing Policy. Kayong mga Pilipino na nakikinig sa akin ngayon magpa- hospital kayo ako ang magbayad tutal hindi naman nila ako mademanda. Pasok lang kayo doon occupy the hospital sabihin mo lang — totoo pasok kayo ng hospital sabihin ninyo na sabi ni Mayor. Duterte pagamot daw kami siya daw ang bahala magbayad. Marami tayong tresurero dito. I have signed Executive Order No. 26 imposing a ban on smoking in public places to mitigate its consequences. We want to minimize access to tobacco products, and provide a more supportive environment for those who are attempting to quit tobacco use. Alam mo bakit? Tinamaan ako ng … Di ba ito, I have been frank with you. I have a Barrett and I have a Buerger's disease, caused by smoking. Ang problema niyan — in a survey in the Philippines and all over the world, why is it that the women force — workforce in an office and the men have acquired in equal, almost in parity in numbers sick of cancer. And it was found out because the poor girl has also to — inhale your smoke. Kaya ko sa Davao… In Davao you cannot see a person there walking with a cigarette. Foreigners, they are — they can argue with you, say that, -This is my money not your money.? Sabi ko,. -Then, . Eat your money or I will shoot your b****.? Investing in the health sector is never a cost to be endured but an opportunity to be explored. If we are to embrace the vision of a prosperous Philippines, we have to putting value to our people's -being - because the success of every Filipino's pursuit in life, liberty and happiness directly mirrors the fulfilment of our aspirations as a Filipino. I would to reiterate my personal and this administration's commitment to implement the Magna Carta of Women to the barangay level tapos na ito. To this effect, an executive order will be issued to local government units institutionalizing gender and development programs and services. We are targeting to increase Government spending on infrastructure from 5 percent of GDP in 2017 to 7 percent of GDP by 2022, amounting to a total of 8 to 9 trillion pesos or 160 to 180 billion dollars in infrastructure projects. We will make the next few years the -Golden Age of Infrastructure? In the Philippines to enhance our mobility and connectivity, and thereby spur equitable growth and development in the country. In other words, we are going to Build, Build and Build. To improve our sea connectivity, we launched 15 brand new RORO vessels to ply major nautical routes all over the country. We also opened an ASEAN Ro-Ro Shipping Route connecting the ports of Davao and General Santos, Philippines to Bitung, Indonesia. To address the congestion in our sea ports, we modernized the Ports of Iloilo, General Santos and Cagayan de Oro and Zamboanga. We shall complete strategic road and bridge projects and some of the road sections shall be widened and improved to address the worsening traffic. Alam mo si Ma'am Grace, you are pushing for… You know, when I became President, EDSA was already horrendous as it was a horror of the other administrations. Now, I brought in Tugade because Tugade to me is a bright boy. He's a billionaire. He was my classmate. Ewan ko kung nandito siya. He was our valedictorian in the law class. Talagang mahusay. But we needed money and we tried to get your help to raise money. Ayaw naman ibigay. Eh di hanggang ngayon nandiyan pa yung EDSA. Lang, at least gumanda lahat mag-iwan naman tayo ng pangit. We will not make it all smooth in the Philippines. We leave a little alley known as EDSA as the road to perdition. But since I could not get any funding. I traveled to China and make friends with them, and the ambassador is here, Ambassador Zhao, thank you for the help. And as a matter of fact willing… He said, -If your Congress has no money, we will give you the money.? And China has committed to build two bridges to span Pasig River, free of charge. That you will be comfortable in crossing Pasig. , all of these strategic road and transport projects shall go to naught if we cannot free our streets, which continue to be obstructed by illegally parked vehicles, yang EDSA na yan traffic obstructionists or undisciplined drivers who stop in the middle of the road, and unsanctioned barriers in some areas. I am directing the MMDA and the LGUs of Metro Manila, as as the LGUs of Metro Cebu and of all our regional centers, to ensure the free flow of traffic, and immediately clear our roads and thoroughfares of all unnecessary obstruction, including vehicles parked on the streets and barriers — sanctioned by the Government, and penalize all traffic obstructionists regardless of stature… Sometimes hindi mo maano diyan because the police, it's a Cabinet member. Pero may I have not — authorized my Cabinet member to utilize the low plate. Is it not for us to, you use an ordinary plate, para walang masabi yung tao. I do not want you parking there when there's no parking. Please remove… Airports, we are building new airports. We get some money also from China and will have new airports in the coming days. We are now accelerating the implementation of the Communications, Navigation, Surveillance and Air Traffic Management System project, which will result to on-time arrivals and departures, better managed air traffic, reduced flight operating costs, and safer and more convenient travel experience. Revenues are the lifeblood of the government, which enable us to provide for the people's needs. Last May 31, 2017, we achieved the first step towards more equitable taxes to fund better services for the people. I commend the House of Representatives for heeding my urgent certification of the tax reform by passing the first of five packages of the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program with an overwhelming 246 votes, representing almost percent of the Filipino people. The fate of the tax reform is now in the hands of the Senate. Ano bang gustong ninyong gawain, mag-luhod ako niyan? , I'll leave it up to you. We are all Filipinos. If you think that's a waste, fine. If you think it's not good, it's with me. I can survive. I call on the Senate to support my tax reform in full and to pass it without haste . Ayaw man magpakpak — ah pati si ano wala, they are not clapping . Si Angara ayaw rin mag-clap. Bantay ka lang sa election tingnan mo. These reforms are designed to be pro-poor, when the people understand how the revenues will be spent. The passage of the Tax Reform Law is needed to fund the proposed 2018 budget which I am submitting here and today. The poor and vulnerable are at the heart of my tax reform. Your full support will ensure that the benefits of the tax reform can be felt immediately by them. In the meantime, the Department of Finance and Bureau of Internal Revenue are strengthening and running after tax evaders. I have directed the Department of Finance and the BIR to accept Mighty Corporation's offer of P25 billion to settle its tax liabilities. After the settlement, Mighty will no longer engage in the tobacco business. This will be the biggest tax settlement on record. It will produce a windfall for government, which is significant, since we face the unexpected costs of rebuilding Marawi and Ormoc. The acceptance of the tax settlement offer does not preclude other criminal charges against the company that the BIR may decide to file. A settlement will allow government to avoid a long battle that, as we saw in previous cases, could take years to resolve. Let this be a lesson to others. This administration will spare no one found cheating the government of its due. We view Information and Communications Technology or ICT as an effective medium to implement positive and meaningful changes in our society. To this end, my Cabinet approved the National Broadband Plan of 2017 to the work of bringing affordable Internet access to every community and improving broadband connectivity in the country. We have also installed free Wi-Fi Internet in almost 400 public places around the country. We hope that the public will use them to access important information and services. The National Government Portal, which we launched recently, will allow faster and easier delivery of public services and reduce the number of visits of the public to agencies for government transactions. The Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting Migration Plan has also been launched. The switch to digital from analog transmission will not only give a better TV viewing experience but also provide effective and reliable information to Filipinos in times of calamities. The government-owned Salaam Digital TV, the first Muslim TV in the Philippines, is now already on test broadcasting. There are some of the we have done for the past twelve months. A more detailed narrative is contained in my Report to the People, will be released soon. Whether or not my first year of administration was a year of gains or a year of setbacks is not for me to say but for the people to judge. I defer to the people's judgment . My fellow citizens, remains to be done. Corruption persists a fishbone stuck in the throat. It pains and it is disconcerting. We need to pry corruption from the government corpus is deeply embedded. We also need to put an end to squabbles and bickerings within agencies focus on the speedy provision of quality public services to our people. Believe me, it is easier to build from scratch than to dismantle the rotten and rebuild upon its rubble. Nevertheless, let us work together and lay a new foundation upon which a better Philippines can be reconstructed. Help me build a better tomorrow. Let me end… Gusto ninyo uwi na tayo? O gusto ninyo ng kwento? Marami pa akong ikwento sa inyo. Let me end by wishing everyone in the language of the old: -May God keep us forever sheltered in the hollow of His hand.? Salamat. Kindly sit down. Thank you for your courtesy. Senate President Vicente Sotto III and the members of the Senate; House Speaker Pantaleon Alvarez and the members of the House of Representatives; Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo; Former Presidents Fidel V. Ramos, Joseph Ejercito Estrada, and Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo; His Excellency Gabriele Caccia and the esteemed members of the diplomatic corps; Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea and the members of the Cabinet; Acting Chief Justice Antonio Carpio and the justices of the Supreme Court; my fellow workers in government; mga kababayan. About two years ago, I solemnly took my oath as a worker of the national government. I was as inspired to institute changes for the greater good of the Filipino people, as I was greatly overwhelmed then by the daunting challenges that lay ahead. Two years later, my solid commitment to directly and decisively address our nation's collective challenges remains. It has not wavered. In truth, it has even gotten stronger through adversity and the desire to give the people the we can, within my term in this government. Let me by putting it bluntly: the war against illegal drugs is far from over. Where before, the war resulted in the seizure of illegal drugs worth millions of pesos, today, they run billions in peso value. I can only shudder at the harm that those drugs could have caused had they reached the streets of every province, city, municipality, barangay and community throughout the country. This is why the illegal drugs war will not be sidelined. Instead, it will be as relentless and chilling, if you will, as on the day it began. These drug dealers know that their business is against the law. They know the consequences of their criminal acts, when caught in flagrante delicto and they violently resist arrest. They know that illegal drugs waste away lives, dysfunctionalize families, and ruin relationships. They know that once hooked, addicts will die slowly — slow deaths. And yet, they persist in doing what they do, oblivious to the terrible harm that they cause to the people and communities. And when illegal drug operations turn nasty and bloody, advocates of human rights lash at-and pillory-our law enforcers and this administration to no end. Sadly, I have yet to hear howls of protest from the human rights advocates and church leaders against drug-lordism, drug dealing and drug pushing as forceful and vociferous as the ones directed against the alleged errant enforcers in the fight against this social scourge. If you think that I can be dissuaded from continuing this fight because of demonstrations, your protests, which I find, by the way, misdirected, then you got it all wrong. Your concern is human rights, mine is human lives. The lives of our youth are being wasted and families are destroyed, and all because of the chemicals called shabu, cocaine, cannabis, and heroine. Human rights to me means giving Filipinos, those at the society's fringes, a decent and dignified future through the social and physical infrastructures necessary to better their lives. The lives and freedoms and the hard-earned property of every Filipino whose condition we wish to improve shall be protected from criminals, terrorists, corrupt officials, and traffickers contrabands. You worry about the present; I am concerned both the present and the future. I worry about the future because I know what crimes can do to the youth of this country. If not stopped, crimes can make human cesspools of succeeding generations. I will not allow it to happen. Not during my term. Time and again, I have stressed that corruption must stop. Corruption is a leech that it bleeds the government of funds programmed for its infrastructure and other social development projects. It saps the morale or the morale of dedicated and honest government workers. Corruption destroys those who succumb to its temptation and eventually it is the innocent who will suffer and bear its horrible consequences. The love of money is corrosive. And sadly, the desire to make the easy kind by being imaginative and manipulative, corrupts . Stolen wealth does not make the thief respectable. Neither will the trappings of wealth mask cap the stink that thievery exudes. One day, justice will catch up with those who steal government funds. And when that day comes, it will be the public who will have its retribution. While we run after those who steal the people's money, we are also enhancing the government's delivery of frontline services. I thank Congress for the swift passage of the Ease of Doing Business , which is a significant fight against corruption and improving service delivery. We need to sustain our momentum. And I hereby direct all government units — makinig sana kayo — and government agencies to faithfully implement this law and simplify the process. Hinihingi ko ho 'yan sa lahat nasa gobyerno under my control and supervision. Huwag ho kayong magkamali. I call the attention of the agencies with the number of red tape-related reports from the public, make your services customer-friendly. Our people deserve efficient, effective, and responsive government services. They deserve nothing less. Kayo lang ang ayaw eh. Gusto ng tao kayo 'yung binabayaran, make your living from the pockets of the people, and you have a lousy and corrupt bureaucracy. I have friends and political supporters whom I appointed to public office and then dismissed or caused to resign. I need not mention their names or recount the circumstances surrounding their removal or resignation. Media has more than amply reported that. I value friendship, make no mistake about it. But it has its limits. This is a lonely place I am hemmed in. Do not make it lonelier by forcing me to end our friendship because you gave me the reason to end it. It pains me to end — the loss of friendships. And that is why I appeal to you to help me in my cause that our friendship will endure. For as long as I can remember, the bulk of the income generated in Mindanao used to be remitted to what we, in Mindanao, refer as the "Imperial Manila" to fund national projects in the Metro Manila area, leaving a pittance to Mindanao as its share thereof. Mindanao was dubbed as "The Land of Promise," and Mindanaoans say in derision that this is because what it got from the government through the years were promises, promises and more promises. We aim to rectify that derisive observation and, as a matter of fact, we are now in the process of fulfilling that promise through significant increases in the budget for Mindanao. At the end of my term, I hope to see the promise of Mindanao fulfilled, or at the least, approaching fulfillment. Be that as it may, Mindanao pauses at the crossroads of history. One road leads to harmony and peace; the other, to war and human suffering. Despite all that has been said or against the Bangsamoro Organic Law by all sectoral groups, I make this solemn commitment that this administration will never deny our Muslim brothers and sisters the basic legal tools to chart their own destiny within the Constitutional framework of our country. When the approved version is transmitted and received by my office… The law has been passed and I intend to… Give me 48 hours to sign it and ratify the law. Babasahin ko pa bago ko pipirmahan. Baka may isiningit kayo diyan na hindi maganda para sa — para sa ibang tao. We will need loads of understanding and patience to endure and overcome the birth pangs or pains of the new beginning. To me, war is not an option. We have been through the catastrophe in Marawi. We have seen the horror, the devastation, and the human toll and the displacement of both Christians and Muslims alike. I have made a pledge that ISIS terrorists or groups or its allies will never gain foothold in our country. Yet, when what remained of the decimated Maute-ISIS group in Marawi finally saw the error of their ways and expressed their desire to be reintegrated into society, we welcomed them with open arms and embarked on genuine efforts to embrace a peaceful, productive life for them. We owe it to our fallen soldiers and police officers in Marawi and elsewhere to put an end to the bloodshed and seek the path of true peace-a peace that will last beyond this lifetime, and whose dividends our children will reap. On international relations, we shall continue to assert and pursue an independent foreign policy. Our long-term national development and national security goals come first. We shall continue to reach out to all nations regardless of their prevailing political persuasions or proximity to or distance from our shores long as these nations wish us . Our stronger bonds with our ASEAN friends have made possible our trilateral border patrols with Indonesia and Malaysia, which has since then put out of business sea pirates, piracy and other terrorists who used to infest our shared seas. This is a testament to the readiness of our country and our good neighbors to make regional peace and security our shared responsibility. We have successfully hosted the 50th ASEAN Anniversary and the 31st ASEAN Summit last November 2017. We have shown the world what we are capable of when we work together. The ASEAN events showcased not only the world-renowned Filipino hospitality and organizational capabilities but also our artistic talent. I would to commend the Organizing Council led by no less than my Executive Secretary, Salvador Medialdea. Our re-energized relations with China has also led to an unprecedented level of cooperation between our nations on the war against transnational crimes. Our shared intelligence led to the discovery and dismantling of the clandestine shabu laboratories and the arrest of Chinese chemists with the Dragon organization called Wu Syndicate. Our improved relationship with China, however, does not mean that we will waver in our commitment to defend our interests in the West Philippine Sea. This is why we engage China through bilateral and multilateral platforms such as the ASEAN-China and the Philippines- China Bilateral Consultation Mechanism. Opening lines of communication and amicably managing differences have led to positive developments that include renewed access of Filipino fishermen in the areas in dispute in the Philippines — West Philippine Sea. Participation in the ASEAN-China dialogue has also resulted to the draft framework for the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea which intends to resolve disputes by peaceful means. We admire our Filipino migrant workers for their selflessness and courage in enduring the hardships of living away from home to provide for their families. You epitomize the innate resilience of the nation. You have shown your willingness to toil and sacrifice day-in and day-out, for the long-term good of your family and loved ones. You have also contributed greatly to the national economy, even as you help in small and big ways to the economies of our international partners. This is why we condemn the deaths and abuses experienced by Filipino migrant workers in the hands of their foreign employers. I have said this before and I say it again: I am a worker of government, and it is my vow to make sure that your -being remains our foremost foreign policy concern. It is for this reason that we are continuing to work with the host nations to ensure the welfare of our countrymen. I appeal to all host governments to help us, as true and dependable partners, in this endeavor. I have always believed that no matter how -intentioned a leader is, no matter how - conceived may be his mission, if he lacks the political will to do what needs to be done, then he can only end up a failure and a hopeless dreamer. As a worker of government, I promised to do it would take to give all Filipinos a comfortable life, fighting powerful interests and making sacrifices. My obligation is to promote and uphold the greatest good, for the greatest number. Our campaign against Endo has resulted in the regularization of more than 300,000 workers as of early this month. On May 1 of this year, I signed Executive Order 51, which sought to protect the workers to security of tenure. Read my lips, I understand that this does not satisfy all sectors. I share their sentiment; I do. As I would to do the impossible, that power is not vested upon me by the Constitution. And neither will I make both ends meet even if I violate the laws to achieve that purpose, it is not part of my territory. That is why I add mine to their voices in asking Congress to pass legislation ending the practice of contractualization once and for all. Our farmers, our coconut farmers, form a significant part of the basic sectors of society. It is from the toil of their hands that we put food on the table. It is my hope that we finally see this through. I urge you Congress to convene the conference committee and pass at the soonest possible time the bill establishing the Coconut Farmers' Trust Fund. I pray that you will do it. My administration remains firm in its resolve to ensure that the country's telecommunications services are reliable, inexpensive and secure. A draft Terms of Reference for the entry of a new, major industry player is at hand. The terms will be fair, reasonable and comprehensive. It will be inclusive it will be open to all interested private parties, both foreign and local. The only condition is that the chosen entity must provide the best possible services at reasonably accessible prices. However, our efforts to usher in a new major player shall be rendered futile if we do not improve its odds of success in an industry that has long been dominated by a entrenched duopoly. We shall, therefore, lower interconnection rates between all industry players. Not only to lessen the cost to the consumers as it will also lower the costs incoming player to access existing networks, a market environment that is more conducive to competition. This is a policy which is crucial to ensure that our solution to our telecommunication problems will be both meaningful and lasting. In the last 2 years, experience has taught me that lack of consultation or insufficiency of information can, at times, lead to rash judgments. If and when I am unsure on the appropriate course of action to take given the problem, it's factual milieu and the desired end, I never fail to consult to discuss options with persons whom I trust and whose advise I value. When I decided to establish Malasakit Centers in Cebu, Tacloban and Iloilo, my long-time aide, Bong Go and his team became instrumental in arriving at the decision through proper consultations. Deliberations with the proper agencies also made me decide to push for, and eventually approve, both the Tertiary Education Act and the increase in the salary of our men in uniform, our soldiers and our policemen. Boracay Island, regarded as one of our country's treasures and admired worldwide for its natural beauty, has sadly become the representation of the government's negligence, including mine. I could not allow this decay to continue; decisive action has long been overdue. Recognizing that we are mere stewards of our natural resources, and I said enough is enough. We intend to restore its environmental integrity, alongside measures to alleviate those whose livelihood were momentarily affected. Environmental protection and ensuring the health of our people cannot be overemphasized; thus, our actions in Boracay mark the beginning of a new national effort. This is . For the other tourist destinations needing urgent rehabilitation and enforcement of environmental and other laws shall soon follow. I urge our local government units to proactively enforce our laws and not wait for us to swoop down on your areas to do your duty and work. At some other time, I would have to discuss sa local government units. What has happened to Boracay is an indication of the long-overdue need to rationalize, in a holistic and sustainable manner, the utilization, management, and development of our lands. I therefore urge the Senate to urgently pass the National Land Use Act to put in place a national land use policy that will address our competing land requirements for food, housing, businesses, and environmental conservation. We need to do this now. To help safeguard the present and the future generations, we have to earnestly undertake initiatives to reduce our vulnerabilities to natural hazards, and bolster our resilience to the impact of natural disasters and climate change. As I had stated last year, we must learn from the experiences from the Super-typhoon Yolanda, and other mega disasters, and from global best practices. We need a empowered department characterized by a unity of command, science-based approach and full-time focus on natural hazards and disasters, and the wherewithal to take charge of the disaster risk reduction; preparedness and response; with better recovery and faster rehabilitation. Hence, we, in the Cabinet, have approved for immediate endorsement to Congress the passage of a law creating the "Department of Disaster Management," an inter-agency — FEMA. , I don't know if it's — it's an effective agency in the United's government. An inter-agency crafted and a high-priority measure aimed at genuinely strengthening our country's capacity for to natural disasters. I fervently appeal to Congress to pass this bill with utmost urgency. Our people's safety requirements cannot wait. Ours is a rich and beautiful country, indeed. Add to that a great number of people equipped with technical expertise and professionalism, and you have a country poised to soar and take its place among the world's economic and financial eagles. God willing. Inshallah. Nature endowed us with this wealth to be tapped for the benefit of all generations. My policy in the utilization of these resources is non-negotiable: the protection of the environment must be top priority and extracted resources must be used for the benefit of the Filipino people, not a select few. Do not give me taxes. I can get it from other sources. Give me what needs to be given to my countrymen. To the mining industry, I say this once again and for the last time, do not destroy the environment or compromise our resources; repair what you have mismanaged. To change management radically because this time you will have restrictive policies. The prohibition of open pit mining is one. It is destroying my country. It is destroying the environment. It will destroy the world of tomorrow for our children. Again, I warn irresponsible miners, along with their patrons, to stop destroying our watersheds, recharge areas, forests, and aquatic resources. You can no longer fish in our rivers. It's all contaminated. And the color is not even brown or white, it's black. You want to see it? I will invite you. We can go to Diwalwal and the other mining areas. And I'm sure you will puke with what is happening to this country. Expect reforms, radical ones. I do not intend to quarrel with anybody, with the moneyed, but for as long as I am here I said: you will have to contend with me. I expect you to do your part in ensuring our nation's sustainable development, starting now. I exhort all concerned agencies and local government units to uphold the concept of inter-generational responsibility in and utilization of our mineral wealth, the protection and preservation of our biodiversity, anchored on the to a balanced and healthy ecology. I applaud Congress for the timely passage of the TRAIN law. You have made funds available to build better roads and bridges, and improve health and education, and strengthen our safety and security. Some have incorrectly blamed our efforts toward a fairer tax system for all the price increases in the past months, and some irresponsibly suggesting to stop TRAIN's implementation. We cannot and should not. We need this for sustainable growth that leaves no Filipino left behind. TRAIN is already helping poor families and senior citizens cope up with rising prices. We have distributed unconditional cash transfers to 4 million people, and we will help 6 million more this year. Following the one-peso discount per liter in gas stations, we have also started releasing fuel vouchers to public utility jeeps and other valid franchises. Further, we have fast-tracked the distribution of NFA rice to provide affordable rice for all. This year, we are giving 149 billion pesos worth of subsidies to the poor and vulnerable. Next year, the amount will be increased to 169 billion pesos. But no amount of subsidy can help the poor if some businesses take advantage of the situation to make more money. I ask businesses to cooperate with us in charging a fair price. To help stabilize rice prices, we also need to address the issue of artificial rice shortage. I now ask all the rice hoarders, cartels and their protectors, you know that I know who you are: stop messing with the people. I hate to… Power sometimes is not a good thing. But I hope I will not have to use it against you. Consider yourselves warned; mend your ways now or the full force of the State shall be brought to bear upon you. I am directing all intelligence agencies to unmask the perpetrators of this economic sabotage and our law enforcement agencies to bring them to justice. We are also working on long-term solutions. On top of this agenda to lower the price of rice. We need to switch from the current quota system in importing rice to a tariff system where rice can be imported more freely. This will give us additional resources for our farmers, reduce the price of rice by up to 7 pesos per kilo, and lower inflation . I ask Congress to prioritize this crucial reform, which I have certified as urgent today. Alam mo, ako humihingi talaga ng tulong. Business is for profit I understand that. But the Philippines has always been a playground for, you know, scoundrels and those who do it without considering the plight of the others. It's all conscience. When I ran for public office, I promised to do it takes to give all Filipinos a comfortable life, even if it means fighting powerful interests. I am committed to a comprehensive tax reform, and I ask Congress to continue the job. Package 2 will lower corporate income taxes, for our small businesses. Lower taxes mean they will have more money to invest and create more jobs. More than 99 percent of our businesses are micro, small, or medium enterprises (MSME) and employ around 65 percent of our workers. The enactment of the Package 2 is what stands between today and millions of jobs in the near future. Congressmen Cua, Gonzales, Abu, and Garin and Batocabe, as as the Suansing family, filed versions of Package 2 last March 2018. Salamat po and I support their push to shepherd the bill. I hope the Senate will follow suit, tomorrow, sir. This matter is urgent. Do not be part of the problem by ignoring it. I hope to sign Package 2 before the year ends. I urge Congress to pass it in a form that satisfies our goals and serves the interests of the many, not the wealthy few. By the end of July 2018, all 5 packages of my tax reform would have been submitted to Congress. Apart from TRAIN, rice tariffication, and Package 2, they include the mining, alcohol, and tobacco tax increase, reform in property valuation, reform in capital income and financial taxes, and an amnesty program. I urge Congress to take them and pass them in succession, for there is no chance that we can deliver our promises without an equitable tax system. One of the important thrusts of this administration's medium-term development plan is to cover all Filipinos against financial health risks. That is why I have directed concerned agencies to streamline the various sources of financial assistance for people with health-related needs. We are currently institutionalizing the unified implementation of the "No Balance Billing Policy" through which the government and our private healthcare providers can work out a system that will provide an order of charging of medical expenses. Needs to be done to improve our healthcare system, which remains fragmented, resulting in disparity in health outcomes between the rich and the poor in the urban areas and rural. While investments in health have increased over the years, several policy and operational bottlenecks have constrained universal health care for this country. We shall pool all our resources for health services under the institutionalize primary care as a prerequisite to access higher level of healthcare; and supplement human resource gaps of the LGUs through a National Health Workforce Support System. These will ensure that every Filipino gets the appropriate, affordable, and quality health services in appropriate facilities and will be protected from financial burden due to sickness. To this end, I urge the speedy passage of the Universal Health Care Bill authored by Former Representative Harry Roque. Strong political determination, not political ambition, is the guiding light. I have no illusions of occupying this office one day longer than what the Constitution under which I was elected permits; or under Constitution there be. Four administrations before me have tried to amend the Constitution to be able to introduce amendments and reservations to the charter — revisions to the charter. But none of them has successfully done for one reason or another. I therefore consider it a distinct honor and privilege to have received earlier from the Consultative Committee that I created, the draft Federal Constitution that will embody the ideals and aspirations of all the Filipino people. I thank all the members of the Committee, those who came out from their retirement, for their valuable services in crafting this draft Federal Constitution. I would to extend my particular gratitude to Former Chief Justice Reynato Puno and Former Senate President Aquilino Pimentel, Jr. I am confident that the Filipino people will stand behind us as we introduce this new fundamental law that will not only strengthen our democratic institutions, but will also create an environment where every Filipino-regardless of social status, religion, or ideology-will have an equal opportunity to grow and create a future that he or she can proudly bequeath to the succeeding generations. My countrymen, I will not bore you with a litany of this administration's projects completed otherwise in the process. That would be self-serving. I have instead caused to be prepared a written report on what has — what was and what has been done in the months and in the years to come. The reports shall be made available within the next few days. I was informed that satellite facilities were set up by the Presidential Communications Operations Office in certain far flung barangays as of today the residents of these communities can watch the State of the Nation and for the first time see you on TV. I hope you have enjoyed the experience. In ending, may I quote — I have always quoted but — in my previous talks. One American that I salute, the great Abraham Lincoln. And this has been — I've been in government for the last… If I completed my… If I complete my term, Inshallah, God willing, I would have served government for 40 years. And I came across this statement which has been with me since I was a fiscal in the 70s. And he said: If I were to to read, less answer, all the attacks made on me, this shop, the presidency, as be closed for any other business. I do the best I know how-the best I can; and I mean to keep doing until the end. If the end brings me out all , what is — what has been said against me won't amount to anything. But if the end brings me out wrong, ten angels of God swearing that I was would make no difference. Daghang salamat ka ninyong tanan.
